Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition
2008, Vol. 34, No. 2, 430 – 437

Copyright 2008 by the American Psychological Association
0278-7393/08/$12.00 DOI: 10.1037/0278-7393.34.2.430

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Across-Notation Automatic Numerical Processing
Dana Ganor-Stern

Joseph Tzelgov

Achva Academic College

Achva Academic College and Ben-Gurion
University of the Negev

In this article, the authors explored the existence of across-notation automatic numerical processing using
size comparison and same– different paradigms. Participants were Arabic speakers, who used 2 sets of
numerical symbols—Arabic and Indian. They were presented with number pairs in the same notation
(Arabic or Indian) or in different ones (Arabic and Indian). In the size comparison paradigm, 2 digits
differing both numerically and physically were compared on the physical dimension. Nevertheless, there
was evidence that participants automatically processed the irrelevant numerical dimension in different
notation pairs. In the same– different paradigm, 2 digits were presented either in the same or in different
notations. Participants had to indicate whether the 2 digits were physically the same. The results again
showed evidence for the automatic processing of numerical magnitude for pairs in different notations.
Findings of both experiments suggest that numbers in different notations are automatically translated into
a common representation of magnitude, in line with M. McCloskey’s (1992) abstract representation
model.
Keywords: automaticity, numerical processing, numerical notations

approach to automaticity postulates that to diagnose a process as
automatic, it is necessary to show that it can take place when it is
not part of the task requirement.
There is ample evidence for an automatic access to the numerical magnitude of Arabic digits (see Tzelgov & Ganor-Stern, 2005,
for a review). The main question in the present context is whether
there is an automatic access to the numbers magnitudes when the
numbers are presented in different notations.
Different predictions can be drawn from the different models on
the representation of numerical magnitude. McCloskey’s (1992)
model postulates that numerical information in whatever original
form is converted to an abstract internal representation of magnitude. Thus, on the basis of this model, there should be evidence for
automaticity in both same- and different-notation pairs. In contrast,
Noel and Seron (1993) have argued that each individual has a
preferred code to which all numerals are initially transcoded. If one
of the codes is preferred, the access to the numerical meaning via
the nonpreferred code should be slower, leading to a weaker
indication for automatic processing. As a result, there should be
evidence for automatic processing mainly in the preferred code.
Previous research addressing this issue mainly focusing on the
processing of numbers in Arabic and verbal notations has yielded
inconsistent results. In a study by LeFevre, Bisanz, and Mrkonjic
(1988), participants were required to verify the presence of a probe
number in a previously presented number pair. Items for which the
probe was the sum of the initial pair were rejected more slowly
than items for which the probe was unrelated, thus suggesting that
the numbers’ sum was automatically retrieved. Important for the
present context, the same effect was found when the prime numbers were in verbal or in Arabic notation.
In contrast, the evidence for an automatic activation of numerical magnitude, as indicated by the spatial-numerical association of
response codes (SNARC) effect, was found to be weaker for
number words compared with Arabic numbers (Dehaene, Bossini,

Numerical information appears in different formats, such as
Arabic digits (e.g., 34), words (e.g., thirty-four), and Roman numerals (e.g., IV). Yet there is evidence that when humans perform
a numerical task, the effects of differences in notations are minimal. The comparative distance effect (CDE), that is, faster responses in a numerical comparison task the larger the intrapair
numerical difference, was found for both digits and number words
(Foltz, Poltrock, & Potts, 1984). Similarly, the priming distance
effect reflected in faster parity decisions to a target preceded by a
numerically close compared with a numerically far prime was
found to be similar in size when the prime and target were in the
same or in different notations (Reynvoet & Brysbaert, 2004; Reynvoet, Brysbaert, & Fias, 2002; Reynvoet, Caessens, & Brysbaert,
2002). These findings are usually taken as indicating that numerical symbols are mentally represented by a common code that is
notation independent. Yet the above results were mostly obtained
when participants deliberately conducted numerical processing.
Therefore, it could be argued that they reflect mainly the task
requirement and not the features of internal mental representation.
We believe that analyzing automatic processing provides a
better way to learn about the nature of stored representations
(Ganor-Stern, Tzelgov, & Ellenbogen, 2007). In particular, following Bargh (1992), we refer to a process as automatic when it
runs to completion without monitoring (Tzelgov, 1997). This

Dana Ganor-Stern, Achva Academic College, Israel; Joseph Tzelgov,
Achva Academic College, and Department of Psychology, Ben-Gurion
University of the Negev, Israel.
This research was supported by Israeli Science Foundation Grant 662/06
to Dana Ganor-Stern. We thank Dafna Shamir and Shirly DeGarcea for
their help in running the experiments.
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Dana
Ganor-Stern, Achva Academic College, M.P. Shikmim 79800, Israel.
E-mail: danaga@bgu.ac.il
430

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

BRIEF REPORTS

& Giraux, 1993; Fias, 2001). Finally, Dehaene and Akhavein
(1995) explored the same issue using a same– different task with
number pairs presented in the same notation (verbal or Arabic) or
in different ones (verbal and Arabic).
In the numerical same– different task, where participants indicated whether the numbers had the same numerical value, “different” responses were faster for pairs with large compared with
small intrapair numerical difference, indicating a CDE similar in
magnitude for both same- and different-notation pairs. More relevant for the issue of automaticity was participants’ performance
in the physical same– different task, where they indicated whether
the numbers presented were physically identical. The CDE was
found only for same-notation pairs and not for different-notation
pairs, thus suggesting that numbers in different notations are not
automatically translated into a common representation of magnitude, in contrast with the findings of LeFevre et al. (1988).

431

matic numerical translation to a common representation of magnitude.
As mentioned earlier, on the basis of McCloskey’s (1992)
model, we would predict that the indications for automaticity will
be similar for same- and different-notation pairs. In contrast, on the
basis of Noel and Seron’s (1993) model, if numerical information
is first translated to a preferred code, then the evidence for automaticity should be weaker for number pairs in different notations
compared with number pairs in the same preferred notation. In the
present study, we assume that the Arabic notation is the preferred
one, because of participants’ longer exposure to this notation. This
assumption is supported by a study by Ibrahim et al. (2002),
conducted on the same population, which found that the speed at
which the participants serially connected randomly scattered numerals was faster with Arabic digits than with Indian digits and
that it was faster for same-notation compared with differentnotation numbers.

Present Study
The present study broadens the existing research in two ways.
First, previous studies on the effects of notation on numerical
processing looked mainly at Arabic compared with verbal notations. The main problem with such a comparison is that numerical
information is very seldom presented in verbal notation. In the
present study, we examine the processing of two systems of
numerical notations. We take advantage of the fact that the Arabic
language uses a unique set of numerical symbols, which are
referred to as Indian numbers (see Figure 1). Israeli Arabs are first
introduced to the Indian digits, and only in the middle of third
grade are they introduced to the Arabic numerals. From then on
they use the Arabic numbers exclusively for mathematics, whereas
the Indian numerals continue to be used mainly in written Arabic
materials (e.g., newspapers, books). Thus, the participants included in the present study are familiar with the Arabic as well as
with the Indian symbols, although they are more experienced with
the former (Ibrahim, Eviatar, & Aharon-Peretz, 2002).
Second, in addition to the same– different task, we investigate
the issue of across-notation automatic numerical processing using
a widely known paradigm in automaticity research—the size comparison paradigm. The use of two experimental paradigms, the size
comparison (Experiment 1) and the same– different task (Experiment 2), enhances the generality of our results.
In both paradigms participants are directed to process physical
aspects of the numbers. Of most interest is participants’ performance with different-notation pairs; evidence for an automatic
numerical processing in these trials will support the idea of auto-

Experiment 1
In the size comparison paradigm, pairs of digits varying in
physical and numerical magnitudes are presented on a computer
screen. In the physical comparison task, participants are asked to
choose the physically larger digit while ignoring numerical magnitude. Automaticity of processing of numerical magnitude is
indicated by the size congruency effect (SiCE), which is indicated
in poorer performance in the incongruent condition (when the
physically larger digit is numerically smaller) than in the congruent condition (when the physically larger digit is also numerically
larger; e.g., Henik & Tzelgov, 1982; Pansky & Algom, 1999;
Tzelgov, Meyer, & Henik, 1992).
The SiCE is viewed as indicating that the numerical magnitudes
of the two presented digits were automatically processed and
compared with each other. Some studies (e.g., Ganor-Stern et al.,
2007) found that the SiCE increased with larger intrapair numerical difference, thus suggesting also the activation of the whole
number line (see Tzelgov & Ganor-Stern, 2005, for a discussion of
this point). However, this interaction of the SiCE and numerical
difference was not always obtained (e.g., Rubinsten, Henik,
Berger, & Shahar-Shalev, 2002). In the present study, we look at
the SiCE (i.e., the difference in performance between congruent
and incongruent conditions) and at its interaction with numerical
difference for both same- and different-notation pairs.
Finally, participants also performed the numerical comparison
task in which they had to select the numerically larger digit. The
analysis of this task mainly focused on the CDE with same- and
different-notation pairs.

Method

123456789
Figure 1. Digits 1–9 in Arabic and Indian notations.

Participants. Twenty students of Ben-Gurion University of
the Negev (Israel) or Achva Academic College (Israel) participated in the experiment. All of them were native speakers of
Arabic, who studied in a Hebrew-speaking academic institute.
They participated either for course credits or payment.
Stimuli. The stimuli set was composed by all the possible 28
pairs created from two different numbers in the range of 1–9,
excluding 5. There were thus eight numerical differences, ranging
from 1– 8. Each number pair appeared in the following three

BRIEF REPORTS

required to respond as fast as possible but to avoid errors. The
numbers remained on the screen until the participant’s response.

notations: Arabic, Indian, and Mixed notations (including both
Arabic–Indian pairs and Indian–Arabic pairs). Each of the pairs
appeared twice, once with the larger number on the left side and
the other with the smaller number on the left side, thus creating a
block of 224 trials. Each number was about 15 mm high and 10
mm wide, and the distance between the centers of the digits was
6.5 mm.
In the physical comparison task, the numbers presented were in
one of two physical sizes: large (18 ⫻ 11 mm) and small (12 ⫻ 8
mm). Each number pair appeared four times: twice in the congruent condition (with the numerically larger number appearing in a
physically larger size) and twice in the incongruent condition (with
the numerically larger number appearing in a physically smaller
size). In addition, within each congruency condition, each pair
appeared once with the numerically larger number on the left side
and once with the numerically smaller number on the left side, thus
creating a block of 448 trials.
Apparatus. The experiment was conducted on a Pentium IBM
clone personal computer with a 14-in. [35.56-cm] monitor screen.
The experiment was programmed in E-Prime software (Schneider,
Eschman, & Zuccolotto, 2002)
Procedure. The experiment was conducted individually. Each
participant performed both the physical and the numerical comparison tasks. The order of tasks was counterbalanced across
participants. There was a short rest break between the two tasks as
well as after each sequence of 112 trials.
The participant sat about 50 cm from the computer screen. The
trial started with a fixation cross that appeared at the center of the
screen for 500 ms. Then two numbers appeared, each was 3 cm
apart from the screen center. In the numerical comparison task,
participants were required to select the numerically larger digit. In
the physical comparison task, they had to select the physically
larger digit while ignoring numerical magnitudes. Participants
responded by pressing either the “L” key for the right number or
the “A” key for the left one. In both tasks, participants were

Results
In both experiments, the numerical and the physical tasks were
analyzed separately. Responses to both tasks were analyzed in
terms of response time (RT) and error rate (ER).
Numerical comparison task. Means of RT of correct responses
and of ER were submitted separately for two two-way analyses of
variance (ANOVAs), with notation (Arabic, Indian, Mixed) and
numerical difference (1– 8) as within-participants variables, and
order of task as an across-participants variable. In each task, we
excluded from the analyses trials with RT shorter than 200 ms or
longer than 2,500 ms (1.1% of the trials).
Numerical difference affected both RT, F(7, 126) ⫽ 30.26,
MSE ⫽ 8,035, p ⬍ .001, and ER, F(7, 126) ⫽ 12.06, MSE ⫽
0.004, p ⬍ .001. Planned contrasts revealed that RT, F(1, 18) ⫽
103.45, MSE ⫽ 15,818, p ⬍ .001, and ER, F(1, 18) ⫽ 22.89,
MSE ⫽ 0.01, p ⬍ .001, decreased linearly the larger the intrapair
numerical difference, indicating a CDE (see Figures 2A and 2B).
The CDE was modulated by notation as reflected in both RT, F(14,
252) ⫽ 1.75, MSE ⫽ 4,823, p ⬍ .05, and ER, F(14, 252) ⫽ 2.09,
MSE ⫽ 0.002, p ⬍ .05, as the slope of the linear trend varied
across notations.
Physical comparison task. Means of RT of correct responses
and of ER were submitted separately for two three-way ANOVAs
with notation (Arabic, Indian, Mixed) and size congruency as
within-participants variables, and order of task as an acrossparticipants variable. As can be seen in Figures 3A and 3B,
performance was poorer in incongruent compared with congruent
trials in both RT, F(1, 18) ⫽ 58.35, MSE ⫽ 2,395, p ⬍ .001, and
ER, F(1, 18) ⫽ 6.67, MSE ⫽ 0.004, p ⬍ .05, indicating a SiCE. RT
and ER were also affected by notation as RT was longer, F(2,
36) ⫽ 112.18, MSE ⫽ 3,805, p ⬍ .001, and ER was higher, F(2,

A. RT

800

0.15

750

B. ER

Arabic

Arabic

Indian

Indian

Mixed

Mixed

0.1

ER

700
RT (ms)

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

432

650

600

0.05

550

500

0
0

1

2

3

4

5

6

Numerical difference

7

8

9

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

Numerical difference

Figure 2. (A) Average response time (RT) and (B) average error rate (ER) in the numerical comparison task
of Experiment 1 by numerical difference and notation.

BRIEF REPORTS

800
750

A. RT
0.2

433

B. ER

Congruent
Incongruent

Congruent
Incongruent

700

0.15

ER

RT (ms)

650
600

0.1

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

550
500

0.05

450
400

0
Arabic

Indian

Mixed

Notation

Arabic

Indian

Mixed

Notation

Figure 3. (A) Average response time (RT) and (B) average error rate (ER) in the physical comparison task of
Experiment 1 by congruency and notation.

36) ⫽ 9.46, MSE ⫽ 0.003, p ⬍ .001, for numbers in the Indian
notation.
To verify that the SiCE was not a product of the Digits 1 and 9,
which as can be seen in Figure 1 are highly similar in the Indian
and the Arabic notations, we reran the same analyses excluding
those digits. A SiCE was present in all notations, both in RT, F(1,
18) ⫽ 36.88, MSE ⫽ 3,615, p ⬍ .001, and in ER, F(1, 18) ⫽ 6.66,
MSE ⫽ 0.004, p ⬍ .05, even when Digits 1 and 9 were excluded.
In addition, to check that the SiCE was not a carry-over effect from
the numerical comparison task, we looked at the participants that
performed the physical comparison task first and found a significant SiCE in the RT, F(1, 9) ⫽ 40.50, MSE ⫽ 2,050, p ⬍ .001, and
ER of this group also, F(1, 9) ⫽ 7.46, MSE ⫽ 0.003, p ⬍ .05. This
finding, coupled with the fact that the interaction between the SiCE
and order of task for the whole group was insignificant, enabled us
to rule out the explanation of the SiCE as a carry-over effect.
To check for a modulation of the SiCE by numerical difference,
we ran a three-way ANOVA with notation, congruency, and
numerical difference as within-participants variables. Similar to
Dehaene and Akhavein (1995), we included in the analysis pairs
with a small numerical difference (i.e., 1) versus pairs with a large
numerical difference (6, 7, and 8).
The analysis of RT revealed in addition to the SiCE, F(1, 18) ⫽
36.11, MSE ⫽ 6,342, p ⬍ .001, a significant triple interaction
between notation, numerical difference, and congruency, F(2,
36) ⫽ 10.85, MSE ⫽ 4,245, p ⬍ .001, indicating that the SiCE
increased with large numerical difference only in Mixed notations,
F(1, 18) ⫽ 26.82, MSE ⫽ 3,077, p ⬍ .001. The analysis of ER
revealed a significant SiCE, F(1, 18) ⫽ 11.16, MSE ⫽ 0.01, p ⬍
.001, which increased with larger numerical difference, F(1, 18) ⫽
15.35, MSE ⫽ 0.002, p ⬍ .001.

Discussion
The presence of the CDE in the numerical comparison task with
different-notation pairs suggests that participants translated the

numbers into a common representation of magnitude on the same
number line. Results from the physical comparison task, showing
a SiCE for both same- and different-notation pairs, indicate that
such a translation was conducted automatically, even when no
numerical processing was required by the task. Moreover, in some
cases the SiCE increased with numerical difference, suggesting
that it reflects, in addition to an automatic pairwise comparison of
magnitudes, some activation of the number line also. Note that the
SiCE was present even when the Numbers 1 and 9, which are
similar in the Arabic and Indian notations, were excluded from the
analysis.
There was also a consistent pattern of poorer performance for
Indian notation pairs in the physical comparison task that seems to
be attributable to a somewhat smaller perceptual discriminability
in the physical sizes of the Indian numbers and, as such, has no
theoretical importance.

Experiment 2
In Experiment 2, we corroborated the results of Experiment 1 by
using the same– different task with numbers in Arabic and Indian
notations. As mentioned earlier, a CDE was found in the physical
same– different task of Dehaene and Akhavein (1995) only for
same-notation pairs and not for different-notation pairs. As acknowledged by the authors, the absence of a CDE for the latter
might be explained at least in part by the fact that an Arabic
number and a number word are highly dissimilar perceptually, and
this enabled participants to respond quickly to the task, leaving
little opportunity for the irrelevant numerical value to affect performance. The use of two sets of numerical symbols in Experiment
2 was expected to make the physical same– different task harder
and to enable exploring the presence of a CDE under less speeded
conditions.
It should be noted that the same– different and the comparisons
tasks, although similar, each provide a unique piece of informa-

434

BRIEF REPORTS

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

tion, as the latter provides information on the numbers cardinality,
whereas the former provides information about the numbers ordinality.
There was a procedural difference between these tasks. In the
former, the stimuli were presented on the screen until the participant’s response, whereas in latter task, used by Dehaene and
Akhavein (1995), the stimuli were presented for 200 ms. To test
the effect of exposure duration, we presented the number pairs on
the screen for 200 ms for half of the participants in Experiment 2,
whereas for the other half, we presented the numbers pairs on the
screen until the participant’s response. All participants performed
both the numerical and the physical same– different tasks.

Method
Participants. Thirty-two students of Ben-Gurion University of
the Negev (Israel) or Achva Academic College (Israel) participated in the experiment. All of them were native speakers of
Arabic who studied in a Hebrew-speaking academic institute. They
participated either for course credits or payment.
Stimuli. The stimuli set was created following the method of
Experiments 1 and 2 of Dehaene and Akhavein (1995). The 12
experimental pairs were composed of the Digits 1, 2, 8, and 9.
There were three categories of numerical difference in this set:
pairs with zero numerical difference (11, 22, 88, 99), pairs with a
numerical difference of 1 (12, 21, 89, 98), and pairs with a
numerical difference of 6 and larger (18, 19, 28, 29, 81, 91, 82,
92). In the numerical same– different task, to equalize the frequency of trials from each difference category, the pairs with the
numerical difference of 0 were presented four times each, the pairs
with the numerical difference of 1 were presented four times each,
and the pairs with the large numerical difference were presented
twice each, thus creating a block of 48 trials. Each number was
about 13 mm high and 9 mm wide. The distance between the
centers of the digits was 6.5 mm. Each number in each pair could
be presented in either Arabic or Indian notation. There were thus
three notations: Arabic, Indian, and Mixed notations (including
both Arabic–Indian and Indian–Arabic pairs), creating an experimental set of 48 ⫻ 4 ⫽ 192 trials. Following Dehaene and
Akhavein, to prevent participants from focusing exclusively on the
Numbers 1, 2, 8, and 9, we added 72 distracting trials using the
Digits 3–7. The distracting trials were not analyzed. Please note
that the frequency of “same” responses in the numerical same–
different task was 33% in the experimental set, but it was 48% in
the whole set (including the fillers).
In the physical same– different task, the four pairs with a numerical distance of 0 in both the Arabic and Indian notations
appeared eight times because of a programming error instead of
four times as in the numerical comparison task. Thus, the experimental set included 224 instead of 192 trials, with 29% being
“same” responses. With the additional 106 filler trials, the frequency of “same” responses was 40%. In any case, the critical
comparison was always within the “different” trials, thus making
the difference in the percentage of “same” and “different” responses less important.
Apparatus. The apparatus was identical to that of Experiment 1.
Procedure. The experiment was conducted individually. Each
participant performed both the numerical and the physical same–
different tasks, with the order of tasks counterbalanced across

participants. The participant sat about 50 cm from the computer
screen. The trial started with a fixation cross that appeared at the
center of the screen for 500 ms.
In the numerical same– different task, participants were instructed to decide whether the two numbers were the same in terms
of their values, irrespective of notations. In the physical same–
different task, participants were instructed to decide whether the
two numbers were physically identical. In both tasks, they had to
press the “A” key for a “same” response and the “L” key for a
“different” response. A few examples of same-notation and
different-notation pairs were presented following the instructions
for each task along with the correct responses. Participants were
required to respond as fast as possible but to avoid errors. There
was a short rest break between the two tasks as well as after each
sequence of 112 trials. For 16 participants, the numbers in both
tasks were flashed for 200 ms, and for the rest, they remained on
the screen until the participant’s response.

Results
Numerical same– different task. Means of RT of correct responses and of ER for “different” trials were submitted separately
for two two-way ANOVAs, with notation (Arabic, Indian, Mixed)
and numerical difference (small, large) as within-participants variables, and order of task (first vs. second) and exposure duration
(200 ms vs. unlimited) as across-participants variables. Less than
0.1% of the trials were excluded from the RT analyses because of
RT being shorter than 200 ms or longer than 2,500 ms.
As can be seen in Figures 4A and 4B, performance was enhanced in pairs with large compared with small intrapair numerical
difference in both RT, F(1, 28) ⫽ 26.69, MSE ⫽ 5,845, p ⬍ .001,
and ER, F(1, 28) ⫽ 8.69, MSE ⫽ 0.001, p ⬍ .01, revealing a CDE
consistent with the one found in Experiment 1. In the analysis of
ER, the CDE was present for Arabic and Mixed notations pairs but
was absent for Indian notation pairs, F(2, 56) ⫽ 4.09, MSE ⫽
0.002, p ⬍ .05. Finally, responses were faster when the exposure
duration was 200 ms compared with when it was unlimited, F(1,
28) ⫽ 5.95, MSE ⫽ 11,763, p ⬍ .05.
Physical same– different task. Two analyses were conducted
on participants’ responses to “different” trials. The first was limited to different-notation trials, and it tested the prediction that
processing the numbers’ numerical value should impair participants’ “different” responses to different-notation pairs with the
same numerical values compared with those with different numerical values. This effect is referred to as the value interference
effect. The results of an ANOVA with numerical difference (0,
small, large) as a within-participants variable and exposure duration and task order as between-participants variables confirmed
this prediction. Responses for pairs with numerical difference of 0
were slower, F(1, 28) ⫽ 13.08, MSE ⫽ 8,124, p ⬍ .005, and less
accurate, F(2, 56) ⫽ 33.40, MSE ⫽ 0.006, p ⬍ .001, than those for
pairs with a small or large numerical difference, indicating the
presence of the value interference effect (see Figures 5A and 5B).
To verify that this effect was not a product of the across-notation
similarity of the Digits 1 and 9, we analyzed the different-notation
pairs within the filler trials that included the Digits 3–7. Responses
for pairs with numerical difference of 0 were again slower, F(1,
28) ⫽ 12.23, MSE ⫽ 4,581, p ⬍ .005, than those for pairs with a
small or large numerical difference (549 ms vs. 489 ms), demon-

BRIEF REPORTS

700

A. RT

0.2

Indian
Mixed

0.15
ER

RT (ms)

Arabic

Indian

600

0.1

550

0.05

0

500
0

0

Small
Large
Numerical difference

Small
Large
Numerical difference

Figure 4. (A) Average response time (RT) and (B) average error rate (ER) in the numerical same– different task
of Experiment 2 by numerical difference and notation.

strating the generality of the value interference effect. In addition,
to rule out the idea that the value interference effect was a carryover effect from the numerical same– different task, we analyzed
the responses of the participants that performed the physical same–
different task first and found a significant value interference effect
in the RT, F(1, 14) ⫽ 5.66, MSE ⫽ 22,276, p ⬍ .05, and ER of this
group also, F(1, 14) ⫽ 16.66, MSE ⫽ 0.01, p ⬍ .001.
The second ANOVA looked for a CDE, with notation and
numerical difference as within-participants variables, and order of
task and exposure duration as across-participants variables. Responses were faster when exposure duration was limited than when

650

it was not, F(1, 28) ⫽ 14.03, MSE ⫽ 66,171, p ⬍ .001. Performance was also faster when the physical task was conducted
second rather than first, F(1, 28) ⫽ 5.05, MSE ⫽ 66,171, p ⬍ .05.
Importantly, there was no significant CDE. Finally, there were no
significant effects in the analysis of ER (see Figure 5B).

Discussion
When the task required numerical matching, there was evidence
for a translation of numbers presented in different notations into a
common magnitude representation, as indicated by the CDE

A. RT

0.2

B. ER

Arabic

Arabic

Indian

Indian

Mixed

600

550

500

Mixed

0.15

ER

RT (ms)

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

B. ER

Arabic
Mixed

650

435

0.1

0.05

450
0

Small
Large
Numerical difference

0
0

Small
Large
Numerical difference

Figure 5. (A) Average response time (RT) and (B) average error rate (ER) in the physical same– different task
of Experiment 2 by numerical difference and notation.

BRIEF REPORTS

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

436

present for different-notation pairs in measures of RT and ER.
Essentially, identical results were obtained in Experiment 1 of the
current study and by Dehaene and Akhavein (1995).
When the task required physical matching, participants were
slower and made more errors in responding “different” for
different-notation pairs with the same numerical values. This value
interference effect suggests that participants processed the values
of the numbers appearing in different notations, even when this
was not required by the task. Interestingly, there was no evidence
for a CDE.
We believe that the presence of the value interference effect
together with the SiCE in Experiment 1 suggest that automatic
numerical processing was taking place in the physical task and that
the absence of a CDE is attributable to the sensitivity of our
measures. The value interference effect reflects a difference in
performance between congruent (different numbers in different
notations) and incongruent (same number in different notations)
trials. In the latter, the numerical and physical dimensions activate
contrasting responses, which impair performance, relative to the
congruent trials where the two dimensions activate the same response and therefore facilitate performance. In contrast, the CDE
reflects a difference between two congruent conditions and therefore no activation of contrasting responses occurs, causing the
effect to be weaker and less reliable. In addition, it has been shown
in recent works that the distance effect depends on task demands
and is not a mandatory product of conducting a numerical task
(Goldfarb & Henik, 2007; Pinchas, Henik, & Tzelgov, 2007).

General Discussion
The main question posed by the present study was whether
people automatically translate numerical information presented in
different notations into a common representation of magnitude. On
the basis of participants’ responses to different–notation pairs in
both the physical comparison and same– different tasks, we conclude that the answer to this question is positive.
The strongest evidence comes from the size comparison task
(Experiment 1), showing a SiCE similar in magnitude for sameand different-notation pairs. In most cases, the SiCE increased
with numerical difference, thus suggesting the activation of a
number line. The results from the physical same– different task
(Experiment 2) showed a similar pattern, as performance was
poorer in trials in which numbers with the same numerical values
appeared in different notations compared with different numbers in
different-notation trials. Note that whereas the former provides
evidence for the automatic activation of ordinal information, the
latter provides information for the activation of cardinality. Together, they suggest that a complete representation of numerical
magnitude is created from numbers in different notations when
such a representation is not required by the task.
Participants’ performance in tasks requiring numerical processing, showing a CDE in both same-notation and different-notation
pairs in the numerical comparison task (Experiment 1) and in the
same– different task (Experiment 2), is entirely consistent with the
above conclusion and with the previous findings of Dehaene and
Akhavein (1995) and Foltz et al. (1984).
The present results have implications for models of the representation of numerical information. As mentioned earlier, the
preferred code model would predict stronger evidence for automa-

ticity in the Arabic than in the Indian notation, as participants are
more skilled with this notation. This prediction is not born out by
the current results, as there is no difference between performance
in any of the tasks between Arabic and Indian notations.
In contrast, the abstract representation model of McCloskey that
postulates the existence of an abstract numerical representation
(e.g., McCloskey, 1992; McCloskey & Macaruso, 1995) would
predict no difference in the indications for automaticity between
same- and different-notation pairs. The present results, showing
similar indications for automatic processing in all notations, are
clearly in line with this prediction and, therefore, provide support
for this model.
The current results can also be discussed in the context of the
triple code model of Dehaene (1992), arguing for the existence of
an analogue representation of numerical magnitude together with
auditory and visual codes, with task requirement as an important
factor determining which representation will be used. To accommodate for the present results, the model should be revised to have
room for more than one visual code and should specify an automatic access to the analogue representation from all visual codes.
Finally, to the best of our knowledge, the present study is the
first to look at the use of two sets of numerical notations, and
specifically at the Indian notation. Such research opens up interesting issues for future investigation, such as bilingualism in
numerical cognition and the effect of language characteristics on
number processing.

References
Bargh, J. (1992). The ecology of automaticity: Towards establishing the
conditions needed to produce automatic processing effect. American
Journal of Psychology, 105, 181–199.
Dehaene, S. (1992). Varieties of numerical abilities. Cognition, 44, 1– 42.
Dehaene, S., & Akhavein, R. (1995). Attention, automaticity, and levels of
representation in number processing. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 21, 314 –326.
Dehaene, S., Bossini, S., & Giraux, P. (1993). The mental representation of
parity and number magnitude. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
General, 122, 371–396.
Fias, W. (2001). Two routes for the processing of verbal numbers: Evidence from the SNARC effect. Psychological Research, 65, 250 –259.
Foltz, G., Poltrock, S. E., & Potts, G. R. (1984). Mental comparisons of
size and magnitude: Size congruity effects. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 10(3), 442– 453.
Ganor-Stern, D., Tzelgov, J., & Ellenbogen, R. (2007). Automaticity and
two-digit numbers. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 33(2), 483– 496.
Goldfarb, L., & Henik, A. (2007). You need space to create a mental
number line. Poster presented at the 11th Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Neuroscience Society, New York.
Henik, A., & Tzelgov, J. (1982). Is three greater than five? The relation
between physical and semantic size in comparison tasks. Memory &
Cognition, 10, 389 –395.
Ibrahim, R., Eviatar, Z., & Aharon-Peretz, J. (2002). The characteristics of
Arabic orthography slow its processing. Neuropsychology, 16(3), 322–
326.
LeFevre, J.-A., Bisanz, J., & Mrkonjic, L. (1988). Cognitive arithmetic:
Evidence for obligatory activation of arithmetic facts. Memory & Cognition, 16(1), 45–53.
McCloskey, M. (1992). Cognitive mechanisms in numerical processing:
Evidence from acquired dyscalculia. Cognition, 44, 107–157.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

BRIEF REPORTS
McCloskey, M., & Macaruso, P. (1995). Representing and using numerical
information. American Psychologist, 50(5), 351–363.
Noel, M. P., & Seron, X. (1993). Arabic number reading deficit: A single
case study. Cognitive Neuropsychology, 10(4), 317–339.
Pansky, A., & Algom, D. (1999). Stroop and Garner effects in comparative
judgment of numerals: The role of attention. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 25, 39 –58.
Pinchas, M., Henik, A., & Tzelgov, J. (2007). The access to the number
line representation is task dependent. Manuscript submitted for publication.
Reynvoet, B., & Brysbaert, M. (2004). Cross-notation number priming
investigated at different stimulus onset asynchronies in parity and naming tasks. Experimental Psychology, 51(2), 1–10.
Reynvoet, B., Brysbaert, M., & Fias, W. (2002). Semantic priming in
number naming. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 55A(4),
1127–1139.
Reynvoet, B., Caessens, B., & Brysbaert, M. (2002). Automatic stimulusresponse associations may be semantically mediated. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 9(1), 107–112.

437

Rubinsten, O., Henik, A., Berger, A., & Shahar-Shalev, S. (2002). The
development of internal representations of magnitude and their association with Arabic numerals. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology,
81, 74 –92.
Schneider, W., Eschman, A., & Zuccolotto, A. (2002). E-Prime user’s
guide. Pittsburgh, PA: Psychology Software Tools.
Tzelgov, J. (1997). Specifying the relations between automaticity and
consciousness: A theoretical note. Consciousness & Cognition, 6, 441–
451.
Tzelgov, J., & Ganor-Stern, D. (2005). Automaticity in processing ordinal
information. In J. I. D. Campbell (Ed.), Handbook of mathematical
cognition (pp. 55– 67). New York: Psychology Press.
Tzelgov, J., Meyer, J., & Henik, A. (1992). Automatic and intentional
processing of numerical information. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 18, 166 –179.

Received May 19, 2007
Revision received October 7, 2007
Accepted October 15, 2007 䡲

Members of Underrepresented Groups:
Reviewers for Journal Manuscripts Wanted
If you are interested in reviewing manuscripts for APA journals, the APA Publications and
Communications Board would like to invite your participation. Manuscript reviewers are vital to the
publications process. As a reviewer, you would gain valuable experience in publishing. The P&C
Board is particularly interested in encouraging members of underrepresented groups to participate
more in this process.
If you are interested in reviewing manuscripts, please write to the address below. Please note the
following important points:
• To be selected as a reviewer, you must have published articles in peer-reviewed journals. The
experience of publishing provides a reviewer with the basis for preparing a thorough, objective
review.
• To be selected, it is critical to be a regular reader of the five to six empirical journals that are most
central to the area or journal for which you would like to review. Current knowledge of recently
published research provides a reviewer with the knowledge base to evaluate a new submission
within the context of existing research.
• To select the appropriate reviewers for each manuscript, the editor needs detailed information.
Please include with your letter your vita. In the letter, please identify which APA journal(s) you
are interested in, and describe your area of expertise. Be as specific as possible. For example,
“social psychology” is not sufficient—you would need to specify “social cognition” or “attitude
change” as well.
• Reviewing a manuscript takes time (1– 4 hours per manuscript reviewed). If you are selected to
review a manuscript, be prepared to invest the necessary time to evaluate the manuscript
thoroughly.
Write to Journals Office, American Psychological Association, 750 First Street, NE, Washington,
DC 20002-4242.

