PS YC HOLOGICA L SC IENCE

Research Article

Effects of Fluency on
Psychological Distance and
Mental Construal (or Why
New York Is a Large City, but
New York Is a Civilized Jungle)
Adam L. Alter and Daniel M. Oppenheimer
Princeton University

ABSTRACT—People

construe the world along a continuum
from concretely (focusing on speciﬁc, local details) to abstractly (focusing on global essences). We show that people
are more likely to interpret the world abstractly when they
experience cognitive disﬂuency, or difﬁculty processing
stimuli in the environment, than when they experience
cognitive ﬂuency. We observed this effect using three instantiations of ﬂuency: visual perceptual ﬂuency (Study
1b), conceptual priming ﬂuency (Study 2b), and linguistic
ﬂuency (Study 3). Adopting the framework of construal
theory, we suggest that one mechanism for this effect is
perceivers’ tendency to interpret disﬂuently processed
stimuli as farther from their current position than ﬂuently
processed stimuli (Studies 1a and 2a).
Shakespeare’s Hamlet is a play of 29,551 words about a ﬁctitious
Prince of Denmark. It is also a tragic tale of revenge and existential angst. Although both descriptions are accurate, they
constitute fundamentally different representations of the play.
Distinct cognitive and behavioral consequences might arise
depending on whether a person construes the play in the concrete terms of the ﬁrst description or the more abstract terms of
the second description.
Numerous factors appear to determine whether people represent a stimulus concretely or abstractly. One such factor is the

Address correspondence to Adam Alter, Psychology Department,
Princeton University, Princeton, NJ 08544, e-mail: aalter@princeton.
edu.

Volume 19—Number 2

perceiver’s experienced distance from the stimulus. According
to construal theory (Liberman, Trope, & Stephan, 2007; Trope &
Liberman, 2003), the nearer people are to a stimulus, the more
likely they are to focus on its concrete, speciﬁc details. As they
move farther away, they increasingly focus on its abstract, global
properties (Fujita, Henderson, Eng, Trope, & Liberman, 2006;
Henderson, Fujita, Trope, & Liberman, 2006). Thus, for example, people are more likely to deﬁne eating as ‘‘chewing and
swallowing’’ from nearby and ‘‘getting nutrition’’ from afar.
To test the relationship between distance and construal, researchers have generally manipulated physical distance by
telling participants to imagine that the stimulus event occurred
locally or thousands of miles away. In one study, participants at
New York University (NYU) watched a videotaped conversation
between two students, ostensibly ﬁlmed either at NYU’s Manhattan campus or in Florence, Italy, at NYU’s study-abroad
campus (Fujita et al., 2006, Study 2). Results were consistent
with construal theory, as participants tended to describe the
conversation using more abstract language when they believed
the conversation was taking place in Florence.
It is worth noting that physical distance is only one instantiation of psychological distance, which generally promotes
abstract construal. Psychological distance reﬂects how far a stimulus feels from the self in an abstract psychological space. More
distant stimuli promote more abstract construal regardless of
whether their distance is deﬁned physically (Fujita et al., 2006),
temporally (Liberman & Trope, 1998), socially (Small & Simonsohn, 2006), or probabilistically (Todorov, Goren, & Trope,
2007; Wakslak, Trope, Liberman, & Alony, 2006).

Copyright
r 2008 Association
forCAROLINA
Psychological
Downloaded
from pss.sagepub.com
at NORTH
STATEScience
UNIV on May 3, 2015

161

Fluency and Construal

There is good reason to believe that people make such distance calculations spontaneously, even in the absence of explicit
instruction (Bar-Anan, Liberman, & Trope, 2006). Environmental cues to physical distance interact with proprioceptive
feedback to prevent the perceiver from colliding with objects
nearby (e.g., Bryant & Tversky, 1999). However, these cognitive
processes may have metacognitive analogues. In this article, we
suggest that a stimulus feels psychologically close to the extent
that it feels easy to process.
There are several reasons why subjective ease might inﬂuence
distance judgments. The ﬁrst arises from the large literature on
processing ﬂuency—the metacognitive experience of ease or
difﬁculty associated with a cognitive process (for a review, see
Alter & Oppenheimer, 2007). Researchers have shown that
processing ﬂuency affects a broad array of judgments, including
estimates of truth (Reber & Schwarz, 1999), conﬁdence (Castel,
McCabe, & Roediger, 2007), liking (Winkielman & Cacioppo,
2001), and frequency (Kahneman & Tversky, 1979).
A second reason why subjective ease might inﬂuence distance
judgments is that ﬂuency is an ecologically valid distance cue.
Distant objects are difﬁcult to see, and are thus perceptually
disﬂuent. Also, people are more likely to encounter events that
are closer in space or time (as local papers report local news, and
people more frequently discuss temporally near events than
events in the distant future). Such repeated exposure leads to
increased conceptual ﬂuency (Reder, 1987). The repeated
pairing of ﬂuency and closeness, on the one hand, and disﬂuency
and distance, on the other hand, might lead people to form a
bidirectional association between proximity and ﬂuency over
time (see Oppenheimer & Frank, in press; Unkelbach, 2006).
Given the association between distance and cognitive acuity,
and the fact that ﬂuency affects many types of judgments, people
might infer that disﬂuently processed stimuli are farther away.
Thus, our ﬁrst hypothesis was that participants would perceive
disﬂuently processed stimuli as farther away than more ﬂuently
processed stimuli. Our second hypothesis adopted the logic of
construal theory and followed from the ﬁrst hypothesis: If greater
disﬂuency implies greater distance from the target, then participants should construe disﬂuently processed targets in the
environment more abstractly than ﬂuently processed targets. In
this article, we present ﬁve studies that examined the link between ﬂuency and distance (Studies 1a and 2a) and the link
between ﬂuency and mental construal (Studies 1b, 2b, and 3). To
test the generality of the effects, we used three instantiations of
ﬂuency: visual perceptual ﬂuency (e.g., Reber & Schwarz, 1999;
Studies 1a and 1b), conceptual priming ﬂuency (e.g., Reder,
1987; Studies 2a and 2b), and linguistic ﬂuency (e.g., Alter &
Oppenheimer, 2006; Study 3).
STUDIES 1A AND 1B

We began by examining the effects of visual perceptual ﬂuency on
distance judgments (Study 1a) and psychological construal (Study

162

1b). In Study 1a, participants estimated the distance from their
current location in Princeton, New Jersey, to various other U.S.
cities. One version of the questionnaire was printed in an easy-toread font (ﬂuency condition), and the other was printed in a difﬁcultto-read font (disﬂuency condition). We expected that participants
who experienced disﬂuency in reading the questionnaire would
estimate that the cities were farther away than would participants
who experienced ﬂuency. Noting that people construe more distant
stimuli more abstractly, we expected participants in Study 1b to
describe a city more abstractly when the study materials were
printed in a difﬁcult-to-read font (disﬂuency) than when they were
printed in an easy-to-read font (ﬂuency).

Study 1a
Method
Forty volunteers at a train station in West Windsor, New Jersey,
estimated their distance in miles from 24 U.S. cities. The diverse
sample of participants consisted chieﬂy of male, Caucasian professionals who were waiting for a morning rush-hour train bound for
New York City. As many researchers have done (e.g., Alter, Oppenheimer, Epley, & Eyre, 2007; Oppenheimer, 2006), we manipulated ﬂuency by varying the legibility of the font in which the
questionnaire was written. Half the participants were assigned to
the disﬂuency condition and received a questionnaire printed in a
font that was relatively difﬁcult to read (12-point, italicized Haettenschweiler font: sample ); the other half were assigned to the
ﬂuency condition and received a questionnaire printed in an easyto-read font (12-point Times New Roman font: sample). For each
city, the questionnaire asked: ‘‘How far are you from [city name]?’’
To reduce the variance across participants’ estimates, we began the
questionnaire with a sentence stating that the greatest distance
between Princeton and any mainland U.S. city is approximately
2,500 miles.

Results
As expected, participants who experienced disﬂuency estimated
that the cities were farther away (M 5 1,331.17 miles, SD 5
641.86) than did participants who experienced ﬂuency (M 5
1,251.43 miles, SD 5 586.58), t(23) 5 3.06, p < .01, prep 5 .97,
Zp 2 5 .29. These results suggest that people use visual ﬂuency
as a proxy for distance estimates.

Study 1b
Construal theory suggests that people construe distant objects more
abstractly than they construe near objects. Having shown that cities
seemed farther away when participants received the difﬁcult-toread questionnaire, we sought to show that participants would also
describe cities more abstractly when they received a difﬁcult-toread, rather than an easy-to-read, questionnaire.

Downloaded from pss.sagepub.com at NORTH CAROLINA STATE UNIV on May 3, 2015

Volume 19—Number 2

Adam L. Alter and Daniel M. Oppenheimer

Method
One hundred ninety-six volunteers from various public locations
around Princeton University were asked to ‘‘describe New York
City using one or two sentences.’’ Although participants did not
provide demographic information, the samples consisted of
students and working adults of mixed gender, age, and ethnicity.
Half the participants were assigned to the ﬂuency condition and
received a questionnaire printed in an easy-to-read font (12point Times New Roman font: sample), whereas the other half
were assigned to the disﬂuency condition and received an otherwise identical questionnaire printed in a difﬁcult-to-read font
(10-point, 25% gray, italicized Arial font: sample).
Two raters who were blind to the purposes of the study coded
each description. As many of the descriptions combined both
abstract and concrete elements, each description was coded as
entirely abstract (given a value of 0; e.g., ‘‘New York’s lights,
shimmering in the foggy sky, remind me of outer space’’), entirely concrete (1; e.g., ‘‘New York City is a large city with ﬁve
boroughs and about 18 million people’’), or a combination of
abstract and concrete (.5; e.g., ‘‘New York City is diverse, cosmopolitan, and vibrant’’). The coders were told that
concrete statements refer to speciﬁc, tangible objects. For example, you might describe the act of driving as sitting in a car,
pushing the accelerator, and moving the steering wheel to point the
wheels in the direction you want to go. This is a concrete description. An abstract description of driving a car might suggest
that driving is the act of getting from point A to point B. It is abstract because it describes the higher order concept rather than the
mechanical speciﬁcities of driving.

The coders rated 80.1% of the statements consistently, and a
third blind coder resolved the inconsistencies. An experimenter
(blind to the condition of the participants) resolved the coding
for a few descriptions that troubled the three coders.1
Results
Because the codes were not normally distributed, we conducted
a nonparametric Mann-Whitney U test on the data. As expected,
participants in the disﬂuency condition provided more abstract
descriptions (M 5 .26, SD 5 .37) than did participants in the
ﬂuency condition (M 5 .16, SD 5 .31), U 5 4,127.00, Z 5 2.06,
p < .05, prep 5 .93, Zp 2 5 .02.2
One potential alternative explanation for these ﬁndings is that
disﬂuency fatigued participants, leading them to compose
shorter descriptions. Shorter descriptions may contain less concrete detail, giving the impression of abstractness. However, the
length of the descriptions in the disﬂuency condition (M 5 9.66
words, SD 5 3.57) did not differ signiﬁcantly from the length of
1
The results did not differ when we excluded these statements from the analyses.
2
An independent-samples t test, the parametric analogue of the MannWhitney U test, also yielded signiﬁcant results, t(194) 5 2.04, p < .05, prep 5
.92, Zp 2 5 .02.

Volume 19—Number 2

the descriptions in the ﬂuency condition (M 5 10.39, SD 5
6.48), t(194) < 1; this result suggests that the effects were not
moderated by description length.
A second alternative explanation is that disﬂuency led to
negative mood states and that negative mood, rather than disﬂuency, promoted abstract construal. To address this concern,
we asked two blind coders (a 5 .87) to rate the descriptions on
an affective dimension from 1 (very negative) to 7 (very positive).
The descriptions were equally positive in the two conditions
(Mﬂuency 5 4.49, SD 5 1.36; Mdisﬂuency 5 4.48, SD 5 1.29), t <
1; this result suggests that the effects of ﬂuency on construal
were not merely an artifact of the effects of ﬂuency on mood.
Discussion
In sum, the results of Studies 1a and 1b suggest that greater
disﬂuency implies greater distance from a target and leads participants to perceive the world more abstractly. Next, we sought
converging evidence by attempting to replicate this effect using a
different instantiation of ﬂuency: conceptual priming ﬂuency.
STUDIES 2A AND 2B

Manipulations of conceptual priming ﬂuency rest on the assumption that previously activated semantic concepts are subsequently easier to process and retrieve from memory (Reder, 1987;
Whittlesea, 1993). Researchers have shown, for example, that
people classify nurse as a real word more quickly when they are
primed with the word doctor at an earlier stage in a lexical-decision
task than when they are primed with an unrelated word (e.g.,
Collins & Loftus, 1975). Across multiple domains, conceptual
priming yields effects similar to those of other ﬂuency manipulations (Alter & Oppenheimer, 2007). Accordingly, in Studies 2a
and 2b, we sought to show that people judge a city as closer (Study
2a), and construe it more concretely (Study 2b), when they have
been primed with the city’s name in an earlier phase of the study.
Study 2a
In Study 2a, participants completed two ostensibly unrelated
tasks, the ﬁrst of which primed certain cities, and the second of
which asked them to estimate the distance of both primed and
novel cities. We expected participants to judge the novel (and
therefore less ﬂuently processed) cities as more distant than the
primed cities.
Method
Thirty-two Princeton University undergraduates volunteered to
complete this study during the lunch hour at the student center
on campus. The majority of participants were freshmen and
sophomores, of mixed gender and ethnicity. Most were approached while dining alone.
During the ﬁrst stage of the experiment, participants read a
brief article describing six baseball stadiums. The author of the

Downloaded from pss.sagepub.com at NORTH CAROLINA STATE UNIV on May 3, 2015

163

Fluency and Construal

article rated each stadium on three dimensions (comfort, standard of hot dogs, and ﬁeld quality), and participants were asked
to determine which stadium players and fans liked best. For half
the participants, the six stadiums were in Atlanta, Detroit,
Milwaukee, St. Louis, San Francisco, and Cleveland. For the
other half of the participants, the six stadiums were in Cincinnati, Houston, Pittsburgh, Seattle, Kansas City, and San Diego.
After rating the stadiums, participants received an ostensibly
unrelated second questionnaire. This questionnaire, which was
similar to the questionnaire in Study 1a, asked participants to
estimate the distance from their position in Princeton to 18 U.S.
cities. Half the participants were primed with 6 of these cities, the
other half were primed with a different set of 6 of these cities, and
the remaining 6 cities were novel to all participants. Thus, each
participant was given the names of 6 primed and 12 novel cities.
The 6 cities that were novel to all participants were excluded from
all analyses and served only as ﬁllers, included to increase the
number of unprimed cities relative to primed cities. We included
more novel than primed stimuli to minimize the possibility that
participants would focus on the fact that they had previously read
about the primed cities, which might have prompted them to
discount ﬂuency as a distance cue (Oppenheimer, 2004). We expected each group of participants to rate the 6 cities with which
they were primed as closer than the 6 cities with which the other
group was primed. Thus, for each participant, we calculated the
mean estimated distance to the 6 primed cities and the mean estimated distance to the 6 unprimed cities (i.e., the cities that were
primed for members of the other group). As in Study 1a, we sought
to reduce the variance across participants’ estimates by stating
that the longest distance between Princeton and any mainland
U.S. city is approximately 2,500 miles.
Results
As expected, participants estimated that the primed cities were
nearer (M 5 1,273.02 miles, SD 5 230.42) than the unprimed
cities (M 5 1,416.54 miles, SD 5 284.03), t(31) 5 2.32, p < .05,
prep 5 .93, Zp 2 5 .13. These results replicate those of Study 1a:
Cities whose names are processed ﬂuently seem nearer than
those whose names are processed disﬂuently.

were Black, 7% belonged to two or more racial groups, and the
remaining 9% identiﬁed with one of several other racial groups.
The priming task was similar to the task used in Study 2a.
Participants again selected which of six baseball stadiums fans
and players liked most. In the ﬂuency condition, one of the
stadiums was Dodger Stadium, home to the Los Angeles Dodgers baseball team. In the disﬂuency condition, this stadium was
replaced by Comerica Park, home to the Detroit Tigers.
A subsequent ostensibly unrelated questionnaire asked participants to rank eight statements according to how well they described the city of Los Angeles. Four of the statements were
concrete descriptions (e.g., ‘‘a dry, temperate city’’), whereas the
other four were abstract descriptions (e.g., ‘‘a tangle of freeways’’).
For a manipulation check, we asked a separate sample of 11
participants to rate the concreteness-abstractness of these eight
statements along a 5-point continuum (from 1, strongly concrete,
to 5, strongly abstract). We provided these participants with the
brief description of concreteness and abstractness that the
coders used in Study 1b. As expected, the participants rated the
concrete statements as more concrete (M 5 2.80, SD 5 0.74)
than the abstract statements (M 5 4.03, SD 5 0.85), t(9) 5 2.81,
p < .05, prep 5 .95, Zp 2 5 .47.
Results
Participants ranked each of the eight statements from 1 (best
description of Los Angeles) to 8 (poorest description of Los Angeles). We classiﬁed participants as concrete-preferring if they
assigned superior rankings to the concrete descriptions, and as
abstract-preferring if they assigned superior rankings to the
abstract descriptions. As expected, the percentage of concretepreferring participants was higher when Los Angeles had been
primed earlier in the study (53%) than when Los Angeles had
not been primed (41%), w2(1, N 5 236) 5 3.83, p 5 .05, prep 5
.92, f 5 .13. These results replicate and extend those of Study
1b, in which participants construed New York City more concretely when the request to describe New York was processed
ﬂuently (i.e., written in an easy-to-read font) rather than disﬂuently (i.e., written in a difﬁcult-to-read font).
STUDY 3

Study 2b
Having used conceptual priming to show that people judge
ﬂuently processed stimuli to be physically closer than disﬂuently processed stimuli, we sought to show that conceptual
disﬂuency also promotes abstract construal.
Method
Two hundred thirty-six Princeton University undergraduates
(153 females, 83 males; mean age 5 20.69 years, SD 5 2.22
years) completed this study as part of a larger packet of unrelated questionnaires and received $12 in compensation. Fiftysix percent of participants were White, 18% were Asian, 10%

164

The previous studies suggest that stimuli that are processed
disﬂuently feel more distant than those that are processed ﬂuently, and consequently are judged as physically farther away
and are construed more abstractly. These studies show that
ﬂuency inﬂuences construal in a laboratory experiment, but in
Study 3, we examined the relation between ﬂuency and construal in a naturalistic environment. Additionally, we sought
converging evidence by testing a third instantiation of ﬂuency.
Speciﬁcally, we looked at archival data to examine how the
pronounceability, or linguistic ﬂuency, of an obscure word inﬂuences how people deﬁne that word. We collected the words
and deﬁnitions from a Web community of Balderdash players. In

Downloaded from pss.sagepub.com at NORTH CAROLINA STATE UNIV on May 3, 2015

Volume 19—Number 2

Adam L. Alter and Daniel M. Oppenheimer

TABLE 1
Sample Words From Study 3
Word
Euneirophrenia
Tyrosemiophily
Beestings
Redknees

Sample deﬁnition
offered by a player

Word complexity
(1–10)

Complexity
percentile

The belief that anything is possible with the
correct medication
The love of creating new genres within art
A type of spiced Scottish sausage
Theatrical term referring to an adult actor who
plays the part of a child by walking on their knees

7.90

100

7.48
2.07
2.13

98
2
4

Note. Euneirophrenia and tyrosemiophily are examples of complex words for which players tended to give abstract deﬁnitions,
and beestings and redknees are examples of less complex words for which players tended to give more concrete deﬁnitions.

the game of Balderdash, each player attempts to generate a
plausible deﬁnition for an obscure English word without having
ﬁrst seen its true deﬁnition. The player-generated deﬁnitions
and the real deﬁnition are posted on-line with no indication of
which deﬁnition is real, and the players try to identify the real
deﬁnition. A player earns a point when other players mistake his
or her fabricated deﬁnition for the word’s real deﬁnition. We used
the natural variation in the pronounceability of English words as
a proxy for ﬂuency (see Alter & Oppenheimer, 2006). We expected people to create more abstract deﬁnitions for words that
were more difﬁcult to pronounce, and more concrete deﬁnitions
for words that were easier to pronounce.
Method
We collected all deﬁnitions from an on-line Balderdash community (535 deﬁnitions of 95 words) that ran from 1997 until
2004 and attracted 33 regular players. Players had 2 days to
contribute a deﬁnition for each round of play, and then the Web
master posted the real and fabricated deﬁnitions and asked
players to identify the real deﬁnition.
To obtain ratings of the 95 words’ complexity, we divided them
into three subsets of approximately 32 words each. While
completing a larger packet of questionnaires in exchange for
$12, each of 140 Princeton University undergraduates rated how
easily he or she could pronounce each word from one of these
subsets (from 1, very easy to pronounce, to 10, very difﬁcult to
pronounce). These ratings served as a proxy for linguistic ﬂuency
(see Alter & Oppenheimer, 2006).
Two raters blind to the purposes of the study coded each
deﬁnition. As many of the descriptions combined both abstract
and concrete elements, each description was coded as entirely
abstract (given a value of 0), entirely concrete (1), or a combination of abstract and concrete (.5).
Results
As expected, the Balderdash contestants created more abstract
deﬁnitions for the more difﬁcult-to-pronounce words, b 5 .14,
t(533) 5 3.18, p 5 .002, prep 5 .99 (see Table 1 for repre-

Volume 19—Number 2

sentative examples).3 Of the 33 players, 25 (76%) created more
abstract deﬁnitions for less pronounceable words, a signiﬁcantly
greater proportion than might be expected by chance, w2(1, N 5
33) 5 8.06, p 5 .003, prep 5 .98. Furthermore, the mean
correlation between the pronounceability of the words and
the abstractness of players’ deﬁnitions differed reliably from
zero (Mr 5 .16, SDr 5 .32), t(32) 5 2.81, p < .01, prep 5 .97,
Zp 2 5 .20.4 Thus, both deﬁnition- and player-level analyses
revealed that players generated more abstract deﬁnitions for
more difﬁcult-to-pronounce words.
It is important to note that we also found that participants did
not provide shorter deﬁnitions for more disﬂuently processed
words, r(533) 5 .003. Thus, it is not the case that linguistic
disﬂuency only appeared to induce abstract construal because
participants created shorter (and less concretely detailed)
deﬁnitions for more disﬂuently processed words.

GENERAL DISCUSSION

Across ﬁve studies, we have shown that disﬂuently processed
stimuli feel more psychologically distant than ﬂuently processed
stimuli, and consequently are judged as farther away and perceived more abstractly. This effect emerged across three instantiations of ﬂuency (visual perceptual ﬂuency, conceptual
3
The coders agreed on 59.2% of the codes, so, as in Study 1b, a third coder
resolved inconsistencies between the two original coders. We were concerned
by the low level of interrater agreement, so two additional blind raters coded the
statements on a scale from 1 (entirely abstract) to 5 (entirely concrete). The level
of interrater agreement was signiﬁcantly higher (a 5 .66), and analyses using
these ratings showed again that players created more abstract deﬁnitions for
more complex words, b 5 .11, p 5 .005, prep 5 .99. To further ensure that the
effects were not an artifact of interrater disagreement, we eliminated the deﬁnitions for which the ratings differed by more than 2 points on the 5-point scale.
Raters coded the remaining statements with a high level of consistency (a 5
.88), and the effect persisted, b 5 .09, p < .05, prep 5 .93.
4
The effect size in Study 3 is markedly stronger than the effect sizes in
Studies 1b and 2b, probably because of the strength of the ﬂuency manipulation
in Study 3. The font manipulation in Study 1b and the conceptual priming
manipulation in Study 2b were quite subtle, whereas words such as euneirophrenia and tyrosemiophily are considerably more difﬁcult to process than are
words like beestings and redknees.

Downloaded from pss.sagepub.com at NORTH CAROLINA STATE UNIV on May 3, 2015

165

Fluency and Construal

priming ﬂuency, and linguistic ﬂuency) and in both controlled
laboratory studies and a more naturalistic setting.
Although earlier research demonstrated that psychologically
distant stimuli are perceived more abstractly than psychologically near stimuli, the experimenters typically induced psychological distance through explicit instruction (but see, e.g.,
Bar-Anan et al., 2006). The present research therefore makes
two important contributions: First, Studies 1a and 2a identify
processing ﬂuency as a mechanism that drives spontaneous
inferences of psychological distance. Second, Studies 1b, 2b,
and 3 show that processing ﬂuency determines how people
represent and construe stimuli, along a continuum from concretely to abstractly. As this research suggests, the effects of
disﬂuency on construal might be driven, in part, by the effects of
disﬂuency on distance perception. Alternatively, disﬂuency
might diminish the perceiver’s ability to perceive the target’s
details, directly compelling a more abstract construal of the
target. Figuratively, as each individual tree begins to blur, the
perceiver has no choice but to focus on the forest at large.
These studies also represent a novel approach to the study of
ﬂuency. To date, most research on ﬂuency has investigated the vast
array of direct effects of ﬂuency on judgments. For example, stocks
with more easily pronounced names appear more valuable (Alter
& Oppenheimer, 2006), the simpler of two semantically identical
texts seems to come from a more intelligent author (Oppenheimer,
2006), and people are more conﬁdent in intuitive judgments than
in those that challenge intuition (Simmons & Nelson, 2006).
However, researchers have only recently begun to consider the
indirect effects of ﬂuency on judgment. In addition to showing the
direct inﬂuence of ﬂuency on judgments of distance, this article
shows that ﬂuency inﬂuences judgment indirectly by changing
how people construe or represent stimuli. Situations will elicit
different judgments depending on which elements of those situations the perceiver represents; judgments of the desirability of a
visit to the dentist will depend on whether a person is thinking of
‘‘good oral hygiene’’ (abstract) or ‘‘having one’s teeth drilled with a
sharp metal object’’ (concrete). Thus, ﬂuency inﬂuences judgments not only directly, but also indirectly by changing which
aspects of the stimuli are momentarily salient.
In other research on the indirect effects of ﬂuency on judgment, we (Alter et al., 2007) showed that disﬂuency tempers
people’s conﬁdence in their judgments, which leads them to
approach subsequent cognitive tasks more analytically. These
effects were indirect because ﬂuency altered the strategy with
which participants processed the target stimuli, rather than how
they evaluated those stimuli per se. Also examining the indirect
effects of ﬂuency on judgment, Shah and Oppenheimer (in press)
showed that people attend to ﬂuently processed cues in the
environment more carefully than they attend to disﬂuently
processed cues. These ﬁndings, along with those of the studies
we have presented here, show that ﬂuency not only has profound
effects on how people evaluate targets directly, but also on how
they appraise and represent those targets.

166

Perhaps there is value in the idea that one should read classic
texts in their original form. As colloquialisms, common vocabulary, and grammar change over time, new generations of
readers may discover layers of abstract complexity that escaped
their forebears. Had Shakespeare jettisoned Hamlet’s complicated ‘‘To be or not to be!’’ soliloquy in favor of a more
straightforward exclamation of angst, Hamlet might long ago
have faded into obscurity with countless other, more simplistic
literary characters.
Acknowledgments—We thank Wenli Cai, Alice Cassin, Kimberly Chapman, Margaret Gerbasi, Mickheila Jasmin, Sarah
Hendershot, Nira Liberman, Eugenia Mamikonyan, Melissa
Miller, Amy Ricci, and an anonymous reviewer for their helpful
assistance. This research was funded by National Science
Foundation Grant 051811.

REFERENCES
Alter, A.L., & Oppenheimer, D.M. (2006). Predicting short-term stock
ﬂuctuations by using processing ﬂuency. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, USA, 103, 9369–9372.
Alter, A.L., & Oppenheimer, D.M. (2007). Uniting the tribes of ﬂuency
to form a metacognitive nation. Manuscript submitted for publication.
Alter, A.L., Oppenheimer, D.M., Epley, N., & Eyre, R.N. (2007).
Overcoming intuition: Metacognitive difﬁculty activates analytic
reasoning. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 136,
569–576.
Bar-Anan, Y., Liberman, N., & Trope, Y. (2006). The association between psychological distance and construal level: Evidence from
an implicit association test. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
General, 135, 609–622.
Bryant, D.J., & Tversky, B. (1999). Mental representations of spatial
relations from diagrams and models. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 25, 137–156.
Castel, A.D., McCabe, D.P., & Roediger, H.L., III. (2007). Illusions of
competence and overestimation of associative memory for identical items: Evidence from judgments of learning. Psychonomic
Bulletin & Review, 14, 107–111.
Collins, A.M., & Loftus, E.F. (1975). A spreading-activation theory of
semantic processing. Psychological Review, 82, 407–428.
Fujita, K., Henderson, M.D., Eng, J., Trope, Y., & Liberman, N. (2006).
Spatial distance and mental construal of social events. Psychological Science, 17, 278–282.
Henderson, M.D., Fujita, K., Trope, Y., & Liberman, N. (2006).
Transcending the ‘‘here’’: The effect of spatial distance on social
judgment. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 91, 845–
856.
Kahneman, D., & Tversky, A. (1979). Prospect theory: An analysis of
decisions under risk. Econometrica, 47, 313–327.
Liberman, N., & Trope, Y. (1998). The role of feasibility and desirability considerations in near and distant future decisions: A test
of temporal construal theory. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 75, 5–18.

Downloaded from pss.sagepub.com at NORTH CAROLINA STATE UNIV on May 3, 2015

Volume 19—Number 2

Adam L. Alter and Daniel M. Oppenheimer

Liberman, N., Trope, Y., & Stephan, E. (2007). Psychological distance.
In E.T. Higgins & A.W. Kruglanski (Eds.), Social psychology: A
handbook of basic principles (2nd ed., Vol. 2, pp. 353–383). New
York: Guilford Press.
Oppenheimer, D.M. (2004). Spontaneous discounting of availability
in frequency judgment tasks. Psychological Science, 15, 100–105.
Oppenheimer, D.M. (2006). Consequences of erudite vernacular utilized irrespective of necessity: Problems with using long words
needlessly. Applied Cognitive Psychology, 20, 139–156.
Oppenheimer, D.M., & Frank, M.C. (in press). A rose in any other font
wouldn’t smell as sweet: Fluency effects in categorization. Cognition.
Reber, R., & Schwarz, N. (1999). Effects of perceptual ﬂuency on
judgments of truth. Consciousness and Cognition, 8, 338–342.
Reder, L.M. (1987). Strategy selection in question answering. Cognitive Psychology, 19, 111–138.
Shah, A.K., & Oppenheimer, D.M. (in press). Easy does it: The role of
ﬂuency in cue weighting. Judgment and Decision Making.
Simmons, J.P., & Nelson, L.D. (2006). Intuitive conﬁdence: Choosing
between intuitive and nonintuitive alternatives. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 135, 409–428.
Small, D.A., & Simonsohn, U. (2006). Friends of victims: Personal
experience and prosocial behavior. Retrieved November 20, 2007,
from http://ssrn.com/abstract=850108

Volume 19—Number 2

Todorov, A., Goren, A., & Trope, Y. (2007). Probability as a psychological distance: Construal and preference. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 43, 473–482.
Trope, Y., & Liberman, N. (2003). Temporal construal. Psychological
Review, 110, 401–421.
Unkelbach, C. (2006). The learned interpretation of cognitive ﬂuency.
Psychological Science, 17, 339–345.
Wakslak, C.J., Trope, Y., Liberman, N., & Alony, R. (2006). Seeing the
forest when entry is unlikely: Probability and the mental representation of events. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General,
135, 641–653.
Whittlesea, B.W.A. (1993). Illusions of familiarity. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 19, 1235–
1253.
Winkielman, P., & Cacioppo, J.T. (2001). Mind at ease puts a smile on
the face: Psychophysiological evidence that processing facilitation leads to positive affect. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 81, 989–1000.

(RECEIVED 5/18/07; REVISION ACCEPTED 7/24/07)

Downloaded from pss.sagepub.com at NORTH CAROLINA STATE UNIV on May 3, 2015

167

