PS YC HOLOGICA L SC IENCE

Research Article

Nonconscious Goal Pursuit in
Novel Environments
The Case of Implicit Learning
Baruch Eitam, Ran R. Hassin, and Yaacov Schul
The Hebrew University

ABSTRACT—Is

nonconscious goal pursuit useful in novel
environments? The prevalent view of automaticity and
control implies that an unconscious mode of goal pursuit
can only reproduce formerly learned actions, and therefore that its usefulness in novel environments is very limited. Our results demonstrate that this conclusion is not
always warranted, as nonconscious goal pursuit facilitated participants’ learning of the structure of completely
novel environments. Speciﬁcally, two experiments, using
markedly different implicit-learning paradigms, demonstrated facilitation of implicit learning when the goal of
achievement was primed. We propose that nonconscious
goal pursuit can facilitate not only reproductive operations, but also productive ones, and that implicit learning
is sensitive to the organism’s nonconscious goals.
To what degree can people count on unconscious processes to
pilot them toward the future they desire, that is, toward their
goals? Successfully attaining one’s goals (deﬁned here as desired end states) depends critically on one’s sensitivity to the
ever-changing environment and its affordances. Because of the
environment’s complexity, however, the crucial task of identifying goal-relevant structures is far from trivial. In the study
reported in this article, we examined whether nonconscious goal
pursuit (NCGP) can increase the likelihood of learning goalrelevant structures in the environment, thereby boosting the
likelihood of goal attainment.
One answer to the question we have posed may come from
recent dual-system models of reasoning. These models share an
all-encompassing assumption that there are two qualitatively

Address correspondence to Baruch Eitam, Ran R. Hassin, or Yaacov
Schul, Hebrew University, Department of Psychology, Mt. Scopus
Campus, Jerusalem 91905, Israel, e-mail: beitam@mscc.huji.ac.il,
ran.hassin@huji.ac.il, or yschul@huji.ac.il.

Volume 19—Number 3

different mental systems, one that is associative and one that is
rule based (e.g., Evans, 2003; Sloman, 1996; Strack & Deutsch,
2004; but see Keren & Schul, 2007; Osman, 2004). The rulebased system has the ability to reason, deliberate, formulate
strategies, and pursue them, and is generally assumed to require
consciousness and mental resources. The associative system, in
contrast, is assumed to operate automatically, triggering elements from past experience by way of spreading activation.
Given these pervasive models, it seems natural to conclude
that consciously controlled goal pursuit is delegated to the rulebased system, and hence this form of goal pursuit is viewed as
productive, deliberative, and ﬂexible, and as involving intention
and conscious monitoring (e.g., Locke & Latham, 2002). Similarly natural is the conclusion that NCGP is delegated to the
associative system, and hence this form of goal pursuit is viewed
as reproductive, unintentional, and inﬂexible. Indeed, this is the
spirit of recent models of NCGP (e.g., Bargh, 1990; Kruglanski
et al., 2002), which adopt the theoretical view that NCGP is
based on unintentional and nonconscious reproductions of past
associations. Put differently, these models assume that a nonconscious goal can trigger an action (broadly deﬁned) if that
action has formerly been chosen to attain that goal.
Accordingly, the lion’s share of past research on NCGP has
concentrated on overlearned (i.e., strongly associated) means
and goals. For example, Bargh, Gollwitzer, Lee-Chai, Barndollar, and Troetschel (2001) found that people who had been
primed with the goal of achievement invested more effort than
those who had not been so primed (see also Stajkovic, Locke, &
Blair, 2006); Aarts, Gollwitzer, and Hassin (2004) found an increase in the help given to people of the opposite sex when the
goal of obtaining sex was activated; and Fishbach, Friedman,
and Kruglanski (2003) found that people were more likely to
refrain from sweet temptations when the goal of dieting was
indirectly triggered than when no goal was triggered.
Still, given the dynamic nature of human environments
(whether in the physical, the social, or the mental realm), strictly

Copyright
r from
2008pss.sagepub.com
Association for
Psychological
Science
Downloaded
at EMORY
UNIV on April
19, 2015

261

Nonconscious Goal Pursuit

reproductive NCGP is bound to be of limited use. For a system
that is very limited in its conscious processing ability (Kahneman, 1973) yet has many concurrent goals, such a limitation may
even be detrimental. Our study, then, examined whether this
restriction on NCGP can be rejected. Are nonconscious goals
beneﬁcial in situations that require mastering novel environments?
THE PRESENT RESEARCH

Based on the arguments we have just discussed, our general
hypothesis was that NCGP can help people achieve their goals
even in novel environments, that is, in environments with which
they have no prior experience. In particular, we investigated the
hypothesis that NCGP can facilitate learning the structure of
novel environments. To do this, we examined how NCGP inﬂuences performance on implicit-learning tasks.
Research on implicit learning has established that humans
can learn and use complex patterns of information without intending to learn them and without being aware of the patterns
(e.g., Nissen & Bullemer, 1987; Reber, 1967, 1993; for a recent
review, see Frensch & Rünger, 2003). In fact, humans’ ability to
learn relations implicitly seems to exceed their ability to process
this type of information consciously (cf. Halford, Baker, McCredden, & Bain, 2005).
Traditionally, implicit learning was assumed to be a bottomup, unselective, data-driven process (e.g., Cleeremans, 1993;
Hayes & Broadbent, 1988). Therefore, researchers assumed it
was not inﬂuenced by an individual’s goals (cf. Lewicki, Hill, &
Czyzewska, 1992). Recent evidence, however, suggests that selective attention may play a role in implicit learning (Jiang & Chun,
2003; Jiménez & Méndez, 1999; Turk-Browne, Junge, & Scholl,
2005). These ﬁndings, together with the conjecture that attention is
inﬂuenced by goal-driven prioritization of information processing
(e.g., Eriksen & Hoffman, 1972; Posner, 1980), suggest to us that
implicit learning could be affected by the organism’s NCGPs.
We hypothesized that NCGP can enhance implicit learning and
conducted two experiments to test this hypothesis. In both, we
examined whether priming an achievement goal affected performance on an implicit-learning task. To prime this goal, we used the
‘‘unrelated experiments’’ paradigm (Chartrand & Bargh, 1996).
Brieﬂy, following completion of a ﬁrst ‘‘experiment’’ (in actuality, a
goal-priming procedure), participants were presented with ‘‘the
second experiment’’—an implicit-learning task.
EXPERIMENT 1: LEARNING TO CONTROL A DYNAMIC
SYSTEM

individually and were randomly assigned to one of two conditions: priming or control.
Procedure
Upon arriving at the lab, participants were informed that the
experimental session consisted of two ‘‘unrelated experiments.’’
The ﬁrst was introduced as a pilot test in which participants
were asked to perform a word-search task. Speciﬁcally, participants were given a 10  10 array of letters in which they had to
search for 13 target words. In the goal-priming condition, 7 of
these words were associated with achievement (ambitious, aspiration, competition, excellence, ﬁrst, race, and win). In the control
condition, these words were replaced by motivationally neutral
ones (carpet, diamond, farm, hat, table, topaz, and window).
After completing this task, participants in both groups were
thanked and introduced to what was described as the second
experiment, in which they were given an implicit-learning task.
Implicit-Learning Task. The task was modeled after one used by
Berry and Broadbent (1984, Experiment 1). A simulation of a
dynamic system was presented to participants as a sugar factory,
and in each of the 60 trials, participants were asked to reach a
production level of 9,000 T of sugar by controlling the number of
employees in the factory. Critically, participants were not given
the rule that relates the number of employees to sugar production.1
Because the system was dynamic, learning was a necessary condition for attaining the target production value consistently. Participants in past research showed a gradual improvement in their
ability to reach the target—that is, they showed learning—but
could not fully verbalize the nature of the relationship even after
hundreds of trials (e.g., Stanley, Mathews, Buss, & Kotler-Cope,
1989). For this reason, learning in this task is considered largely
implicit.
Awareness Probes. After participants completed the implicitlearning task, we assessed their knowledge of the relation between the number of employees and the factory’s production
(henceforth, the structure). Previous research with this paradigm
utilized two different methods of assessing knowledge (e.g.,
Berry & Broadbent, 1984, 1987), and we used both. First, we
asked participants to describe, in their own words, what determined sugar production. They were offered a monetary bonus for
a correct description. These descriptions were scored on the
following scale: 0 5 no knowledge, 1 5 partial knowledge, 2 5
complete knowledge. Next, participants were given ﬁve prediction problems. Each provided information about the current
production and number of employees and the required target
production for the next trial. The task was to determine the
number of employees needed to achieve the target. Participants

Method
Participants
Fifty-one Hebrew University undergraduates participated in the
experiment in exchange for course credit or pay. They were run

262

1
If n is the current trial, then the rule relating the number of employees to
production of sugar was {2  [number of employees on trial n] [tons of sugar
on trial n 1] 1 noise}, where the noise was equal to 1,000 times 1, 0, or 1
(chosen randomly).

Downloaded from pss.sagepub.com at EMORY UNIV on April 19, 2015

Volume 19—Number 3

Baruch Eitam, Ran R. Hassin, and Yaacov Schul

with perfect knowledge of the rule should have been completely successful. Therefore, this measure of explicit knowledge
ranged from 0 (no correct answer) to 5 (all answers correct).
Participants also answered items about their motivation. Two
of these items assessed their explicit motivation to perform the
task: ‘‘How important was it for you to succeed in this task?’’ and
‘‘How important was it for you to ﬁnd a strategy that would allow
you to control the factory?’’ The third item assessed participants’
intention to learn the structure by asking them how important it
was to ‘‘learn the rule by which the factory operated.’’ Ratings
were made on a 9-point scale ranging from 1 (not at all important) to 9 (very important).
Finally, three items assessed whether participants believed
the cover story, and whether they had any suspicion regarding
the priming manipulation. First, they were asked to speculate, in
their own words, on ‘‘the purpose of the word-search task’’
(which served as the priming manipulation). Next, they were
asked ‘‘whether there was anything noteworthy in the wordsearch task,’’ and last, they were asked directly whether the
word-search task had affected their performance on the sugarfactory task in any way.
Measure of Learning
As the sugar-factory paradigm introduces a completely novel
environment, all participants begin the task with equal ignorance. Given that this environment is dynamic, one’s level of
performance depends on one’s depth of learning. Hence, our
main dependent measure was the number of times participants
attained the production target (e.g., Berry & Broadbent, 1987;
Dienes & Fahey, 1998; Hayes & Broadbent, 1988). A trial was
scored as on target when participants attained the target production level plus or minus 1,000 T (cf. Berry & Broadbent,
1984).
Results and Discussion
The data of 4 participants were excluded from the analyses. Two
suspected the goal-priming procedure, and 2 showed no variance in their responses. Thus, the analyses reported are based
on data from 47 participants (28 females, 19 males) with a mean
age of 23.5 years.
Learning
Our main hypothesis was that goal priming would facilitate
learning, which would be evident in the participants’ performance. Indeed, as predicted, participants in the priming condition attained their goal—the target production level—more
often than participants in the control group, t(45) 5 2.1, prep 5
.93, d 5 0.63 (see Table 1).
Explicit Motivation
Crucially, the two conditions did not differ in participants’ explicit
achievement motivation, t < 1; their explicit motivation to ﬁnd a

Volume 19—Number 3

TABLE 1
Means (With Standard Deviations in Parentheses) From
Experiment 1
Group
Dependent variable
Learning: number of times goal was met
Explicit knowledgea
Scoring of open-ended description
Total prediction score
Motivation
Important to ﬁnd strategy
Important to ﬁnd rule
Important to succeed

Goal-priming
(n 5 23)

Control
(n 5 24)

14.83 (4.65)

11.71 (5.47)

0.10 (0.44)
0.70 (0.97)

0.36 (0.66)
0.83 (0.70)

7.48 (1.53)
7.48 (1.62)
7.26 (1.66)

7.46 (1.50)
7.96 (1.62)
7.29 (1.3)

For the analyses of explicit knowledge, n 5 21 in the goal-priming group and
n 5 22 in the control group.

a

good strategy, t < 1; or their intention to learn the underlying
structure, t < 1.2 (see Table 1). Furthermore, a multivariate
analysis of variance of responses to the three questions, with
priming as a between-participants factor, also failed to reach
signiﬁcance, F(3, 43) 5 1.14. Taken together, these results indicate that participants’ explicit motivation was not affected by
the priming.
Explicit Knowledge of the Structure
There were no signiﬁcant differences in the knowledge participants were able to report, either in their free-format descriptions,
t < 1.6, or in their predictions, t < 1 (see Table 1). If anything, the
knowledge of participants in the priming condition was inferior to
that of participants in the control condition. This ﬁnding is
consistent with the idea that the performance improvement observed in the goal-priming condition depended largely on implicit knowledge.
Discussion
To sum up, Experiment 1 demonstrated that the activation of an
achievement goal improved implicit learning of a novel environment, but not participants’ explicit motivation or explicit
knowledge. Crucially, for this task, participants had to learn the
structure of a completely new environment. Hence, we propose
that NCGP in this experiment was productive, rather than reproductive.
EXPERIMENT 2: UNINTENTIONAL LEARNING

Learning in the sugar-factory paradigm is implicit in the sense that
participants are largely unaware of having learned and of the
nature of what they have learned. Yet this learning may be intentional: Participants may explicitly think that in order to
achieve their assigned goal, they must learn how the factory works.
Accordingly, one may argue that the results of Experiment 1

Downloaded from pss.sagepub.com at EMORY UNIV on April 19, 2015

263

Nonconscious Goal Pursuit

indicate that NCGP can enhance the acquisition of new structures
if, and only if, one explicitly intends to learn them.
Experiment 2 tested whether this is indeed the case by using
one of the most widely studied incidental-learning tasks—the
serial reaction time task (SRT; see Nissen & Bullemer, 1987).
Many studies using this task have demonstrated that people
can learn complex sequences without intending to learn
them and without being aware of having done so (e.g., Seger,
1997). Our prediction was that participants who were primed
with achievement would show more learning than a control
group.
Method
Participants
Ninety-three Hebrew University undergraduates participated in
exchange for course credit or pay. They were run individually
and were randomly assigned to one of two conditions: priming or
control.
Procedure
Participants started with a goal-priming procedure that was
identical to that in Experiment 1. They were then introduced to
the SRT task.
SRT Task. In each trial of the SRT task, participants were shown
a circle that appeared in one of four possible locations on a
horizontal line on a computer screen. They were instructed
to indicate the circle’s location by pressing one of four keys
(‘‘3,’’ ‘‘5,’’ ‘‘7,’’ or ‘‘9’’). The circle disappeared immediately
after the response, and the next circle appeared 200 ms later. An
error was signaled by a red ‘‘X’’ that appeared in the center
of the screen and remained until the participant responded
correctly.
The task began with a practice block in which the location of
the circle was randomly determined. The purpose of this block
was to familiarize participants with the task and to discourage
them from attempting to learn the sequence explicitly (cf. Reed
& Johnson, 1994; Seger, 1997). Next, participants underwent
four training blocks. Critically, in these blocks, the sequence of
locations in which the circle appeared was ﬁxed. (If ‘‘1’’ indicates the left-most location and ‘‘4’’ the right-most, the sequence
was 1324323432; see Stadler, 1992). This sequence was repeated ﬁve times per block. All blocks were 50 trials long.
Following the four training blocks, participants engaged in
three test blocks (50 trials each). In the ﬁrst and third blocks
(henceforth, random blocks), the locations of the circle were
randomly determined.2 In the second test block, however, locations followed the ﬁxed sequence used during learning (cf.
Seger, 1997).
2
There were two constraints on the circle’s locations in the random blocks:
The circle appeared in each location as often as it did in the ﬁxed-sequence
blocks, and it never appeared in the same location twice in a row.

264

In this paradigm, participants are instructed to merely react to
the individual circles. Nothing in the instructions or the explicit
structure of the task indicates the existence of a learnable underlying structure. Hence, learning in this paradigm is considered unintentional.
Awareness Probes. After participants completed the SRT task,
we assessed their awareness and explicit knowledge of the
learned sequence. First, they were asked to describe the sequence in their own words (Seger, 1997). These verbal descriptions were scored using slight modiﬁcations of Seger’s
(1997) scoring criteria. Then, after being informed that the locations were displayed in a ﬁxed sequence, participants were
requested to generate a sequence of 10 locations that would
follow the ﬁxed sequence (cf. Destrebecqz & Cleeremans,
2001). These locations were indicated graphically. A computerized scoring algorithm assessed the level of ﬁt between each of
the generated sequences and the actual sequence used in the
training blocks, yielding a knowledge score that ranged from 0
(no knowledge) to 10 (full knowledge).3
Three items assessed participants’ explicit achievement
motivation. First, they were asked to rate how important it was
for them to respond quickly. Second, they were asked to rate how
important it was for them to respond accurately. A third item
asked participants how important it was for them to succeed. A
fourth item assessed participants’ intention to learn the sequence, asking how important it was for them to ‘‘learn the rule
by which the stimulus locations were determined.’’ All ratings
were made on a 9-point scale ranging from 1 (not at all important) to 9 (very important).
In addition, participants answered questions measuring their
awareness of the goal priming. These probes were identical to
those used in the Experiment 1.
Results and Discussion
The data of 6 participants who suspected the goal-priming procedure were excluded from the analyses. An additional participant, whose learning score was 4 standard deviations from the
group’s mean, was also excluded from further analyses. Thus, the
ﬁndings reported here are based on data from 86 participants (52
females, 34 males) with a mean age of 23.9 years.
Learning
Recall that the locations of the circles were randomly determined in the ﬁrst and third test blocks, but followed the learned
sequence in the second test block. Learning, then, is indicated
by the magnitude of response time (RT) savings (errors are
negligible in this paradigm) that the ﬁxed-sequence block creates (compared with the two random blocks; see, e.g., Nissen &
Bullemer, 1987; Seger, 1997). Figure 1 presents the mean RTs of
correct responses in the three test blocks.
3

The scoring program can be obtained from the authors.

Downloaded from pss.sagepub.com at EMORY UNIV on April 19, 2015

Volume 19—Number 3

Baruch Eitam, Ran R. Hassin, and Yaacov Schul

TABLE 2
Means (With Standard Deviations in Parentheses) From
Experiment 2
Group
Goal-priming
(n 5 41)

Dependent variable
Learning: response time
difference (ms)
Explicit knowledge
Verbalization score
Graphic-probe score
Motivationa
Important to be accurate
Important to be fast
Important to learn rule
Important to succeed

Control
(n 5 45)

39.35 (37.29)

21.77 (40.43)

2.12 (0.78)
5.29 (2.12)

2.11 (0.78)
5.38 (1.95)

7.80 (1.16)
7.08 (1.49)
3.53 (2.37)
7.65 (1.14)

7.58 (1.50)
6.70 (1.79)
4.04 (2.83)
7.13 (1.85)

For the analyses of motivation, n 5 40 in the goal-priming group and n 5 45
in the control group.

a

Fig. 1. Response times of the goal-priming and control groups in the
three test blocks of Experiment 2. The location sequence in the ﬁxedsequence block was identical to that used during training. The location
sequence in the random blocks was determined randomly.

To test this effect statistically, we computed the difference
between the average RT in the two random blocks and the average RT in the ﬁxed-sequence block; larger difference scores
indicate more learning. As hypothesized, primed participants
learned more than participants in the control group, t(84) 5
2.09, prep 5 .92, d 5 0.45 (see Table 2).4 To see whether this
effect was associated with a general enhancement of performance, above and beyond the improvement due to learning, we
compared the two groups’ performance in the two random blocks
and found no signiﬁcant difference in average RTs, ts < 1.5
Finally, we note that participants in the goal-priming condition were faster than control participants throughout the learning stage, albeit not signiﬁcantly so.
Explicit Motivation
The results for explicit motivation replicated the patterns in
Experiment 1. Goal priming failed to induce signiﬁcant changes
in explicit motivation to perform the SRT task accurately, t < 1,
or quickly, t < 1, or generally to succeed in the task, t < 1.1 (see
Table 2). Similarly, there was no signiﬁcant difference between
groups in participants’ intention to learn the sequence, t(83) 5
1.52 (see Table 2). An overall multivariate analysis of variance
of responses to the motivation questions did not reveal a signiﬁcant difference between conditions, F < 1.
4
Average accuracy was greater than 98% and did not differ signiﬁcantly
between the groups.
5
Analyses conducted on the mean of median RTs produced an identical
pattern of results.

Volume 19—Number 3

Explicit Knowledge of the Environmental Structure
As in Experiment 1, the improvement in implicit learning in the
priming condition was not accompanied by changes in explicit
knowledge. Speciﬁcally, the two groups did not differ signiﬁcantly in either measure of explicit knowledge (ts < 1; see
Table 2).
Discussion
To sum up, the results of Experiment 2 replicated those of Experiment 1: Goal priming led to improved implicit learning
without a concomitant increase in participants’ explicit motivation, explicit knowledge, or performance in blocks in which
learning was not instrumental. We conclude, therefore, that goal
priming inﬂuenced primarily learning of the environmental
structure. It is important to note that the use of the SRT task, in
which learning is incidental, rules out the possibility that intending to learn the environment is a prerequisite for the effect
of NCGP on implicit learning. In other words, NCGP can be
productive irrespective of one’s intention to learn about one’s
environment.
GENERAL DISCUSSION

The results of these two experiments support the hypothesis that
NCGP can facilitate implicit learning of the structures of novel
environments. In the sugar-factory experiment, participants in
the priming condition learned more than those in the control
condition. Yet primed participants did not show any increase in
explicit motivation, nor did they indicate more explicit knowledge of the environment’s structure. The results of the second
experiment, which used the SRT task, replicated this pattern.
Goal priming led to improved learning, even though learning

Downloaded from pss.sagepub.com at EMORY UNIV on April 19, 2015

265

Nonconscious Goal Pursuit

was incidental and implicit. As in Experiment 1, participants’
improved learning in the priming condition was not accompanied by an increase in their motivation or in their explicit
knowledge.
Traditionally, implicit learning was considered to be an automatic, unintentional process that is blind to the organism’s
goals. In other words, researchers assumed that one implicitly
learns structures of the environment whether or not these structures are relevant to one’s goals (e.g., Hayes & Broadbent, 1988).
Recently, however, this view has been challenged: It has been
shown that implicit learning occurs only for goal-relevant dimensions (Eitam, Schul, & Hassin, 2007; Jiménez & Méndez,
1999; Turk-Browne et al., 2005; see also Frensch & Rünger,
2003). The current results lend further support to the emerging
view that implicit learning is a motivated process: We manipulated an internal state and showed that implicit learning is
affected by the organism’s goals.
How do goals affect implicit learning? Currently, few studies
provide data to guide an answer to this question, but we offer the
following speculation. Past research has suggested that attention
plays a role in implicit learning (Jiménez & Méndez, 1999; TurkBrowne et al., 2005; but see Jiang & Leung, 2005). We speculate, therefore, that NCGP of the kind we examined here has
access to the regulation of attention, so that processing of goalrelevant information is prioritized. Future research should examine this possibility, and test whether the cognitive system
actively searches for goal-relevant structures in the environment
and whether such structures are prioritized after being identiﬁed
as goal relevant.
We would like to emphasize two theoretical implications of the
current results. First, the results suggest that current models
of NCGP should be expanded in a way that will allow them to
go beyond reproduction of past associations. Although the
current results suggest that NCGP can recruit implicit-learning
mechanisms, the exact nature of this recruitment—and hence,
the exact nature of the proposed expansion—awaits further
investigation. Furthermore, it may well be the case that implicit learning is not the only way in which NCGP can enhance
adaptation to changing environments (cf. Hassin, Bargh, &
Zimerman, in press). Some of us have previously argued that
NCGP can recruit working memory (Hassin, 2005; Hassin,
Aarts, Eitam, Kleiman, & Custers, in press).
Second, our results suggest that NCGP, which has traditionally been ascribed to the associative reasoning system, can perform functions ascribed to the rule-based system. This suggests
that the demarcation between the rule-based and associative
systems may not be as clear as previously thought, and calls into
question the usefulness of that dichotomy.
To conclude, the results of these two experiments reveal an
unconscious process that has both an advantage over conscious
processing and an ability to serve the organism’s current goals.
Such unconscious processes may be responsible for far more of
human ability than is yet recognized.

266

Acknowledgments—The article is based on parts of the ﬁrst
author’s dissertation, which was supported by a Golda Meir
fellowship to the ﬁrst author and by Israeli Science Foundation
Grants 846/03 and 1035/07 to R.R.H. and Grant 371/04 to
Y.S. We would like to thank Asher Cohen, Arthur S. Reber,
and an anonymous reviewer for their insightful comments and
suggestions.
REFERENCES
Aarts, H., Gollwitzer, P.M., & Hassin, R.R. (2004). Goal contagion:
Perceiving is for pursuing. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 87, 23–37.
Bargh, J.A. (1990). Auto-motives: Preconscious determinants of social
interaction. In E.T. Higgins & R.M. Sorrentino (Eds.), Handbook
of motivation and cognition (Vol. 2, pp. 93–130). New York:
Guilford Press.
Bargh, J.A., Gollwitzer, P., Lee-Chai, A., Barndollar, K., & Troetschel,
R. (2001). The automated will: Nonconscious activation and
pursuit of behavioral goals. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 81, 1014–1027.
Berry, D.C., & Broadbent, D.E. (1984). On the relationship between
task performance and associated verbalizable knowledge. The
Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Experimental Psychology, 36, 209–231.
Berry, D.C., & Broadbent, D.E. (1987). The combination of explicit
and implicit learning processes in task control. Psychological
Research, 49, 7–15.
Chartrand, T.L., & Bargh, J.A. (1996). Automatic activation of impression formation and memorization goals: Nonconscious goal
priming reproduces effects of explicit task instructions. Journal
of Personality and Social Psychology, 71, 464–478.
Cleeremans, A. (1993). Mechanisms of implicit learning: Connectionist
models of sequence processing. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Destrebecqz, A., & Cleeremans, A. (2001). Can sequence learning be
implicit? New evidence with the process dissociation procedure.
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 8, 343–350.
Dienes, Z., & Fahey, R. (1998). The role of implicit memory in controlling a dynamic system. The Quarterly Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human Experimental Psychology, 51, 593–614.
Eitam, B., Schul, Y., & Hassin, R.R. (2007). On the selectivity of artiﬁcial grammar learning. Manuscript submitted for publication.
Eriksen, B.A., & Hoffman, J.E. (1972). Temporal and spatial characteristics of selective encoding from visual displays. Perception &
Psychophysics, 12, 201–204.
Evans, J.St.B.T. (2003). In two minds: Dual process accounts of reasoning. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 7, 454–459.
Fishbach, A., Friedman, R., & Kruglanski, A.W. (2003). Leading us
not unto temptation: Momentary allurements elicit automatic goal
activation. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 84,
296–309.
Frensch, P.A., & Rünger, D. (2003). Implicit learning. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 12, 13–18.
Halford, G.S., Baker, R., McCredden, J.E., & Bain, J.D. (2005). How
many variables can humans process? Psychological Science, 16,
70–76.
Hassin, R.R. (2005). Non-conscious control and implicit working
memory. In R.R. Hassin, J.S. Uleman, & J.A. Bargh (Eds.), The
new unconscious (pp. 196–225). New York: Oxford University
Press.

Downloaded from pss.sagepub.com at EMORY UNIV on April 19, 2015

Volume 19—Number 3

Baruch Eitam, Ran R. Hassin, and Yaacov Schul

Hassin, R.R., Aarts, H., Eitam, B., Kleiman, T., & Custers, R. (in
press). Non-conscious goal pursuit, working memory, and the
effortful control of behavior. In E. Morsella, P.M. Gollwitzer, &
J.A. Bargh (Eds.), The psychology of action (Vol. 2). New York:
Oxford University Press.
Hassin, R.R., Bargh, J.A., & Zimerman, S. (in press). Automatic and
ﬂexible: The case of non-conscious goal pursuit. Social Cognition.
Hayes, N.A., & Broadbent, D. (1988). Two modes of learning for interactive tasks. Cognition, 28, 249–276.
Jiang, Y., & Chun, M.M. (2003). Contextual cueing: Reciprocal inﬂuences between attention and implicit learning. In L. Jiménez
(Ed.), Attention and implicit learning (pp. 277–296). Amsterdam:
John Benjamins.
Jiang, Y., & Leung, A.W. (2005). Implicit learning of ignored visual
context. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 12, 100–106.
Jiménez, L., & Méndez, C. (1999). Which attention is needed for
implicit sequence learning? Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 25, 236–259.
Kahneman, D. (1973). Attention and effort. Englewood Cliffs, NJ:
Prentice-Hall.
Keren, G., & Schul, Y. (2007). Two is not always better than one: A
critical evaluation of two-system theories. Manuscript submitted
for publication.
Kruglanski, A.W., Shah, J.Y., Fishbach, A., Friedman, R., Chun, W.Y.,
& Sleeth-Keppler, D. (2002). A theory of goal-systems. In M.P.
Zanna (Ed.), Advances in experimental social psychology (Vol. 34,
pp. 331–378). San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Lewicki, P., Hill, T., & Czyzewska, M. (1992). Nonconscious acquisition of information. American Psychologist, 47, 796–801.
Locke, E.A., & Latham, G.P. (2002). Building a practically useful
theory of goal setting and task motivation: A 35-year odyssey.
American Psychologist, 57, 705–717.
Nissen, M.J., & Bullemer, P. (1987). Attentional requirement of
learning: Evidence from performance measures. Cognitive Psychology, 19, 1–32.
Osman, M. (2004). An evaluation of dual-process theories of reasoning. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 11, 988–1010.

Volume 19—Number 3

Posner, M.I. (1980). Orienting of attention. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 32, 3–25.
Reber, A.S. (1967). Implicit learning of artiﬁcial grammars. Journal of
Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 6, 855–863.
Reber, A.S. (1993). Implicit learning and tacit knowledge: An essay on
the cognitive unconscious. London: Oxford University Press.
Reed, J., & Johnson, P. (1994). Assessing implicit learning with indirect tests: Determining what is learned about sequence structure. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 20, 585–594.
Seger, C.A. (1997). Two forms of sequential implicit learning. Consciousness and Cognition, 6, 108–131.
Sloman, S.A. (1996). The empirical case for two systems of reasoning.
Psychological Bulletin, 119, 3–22.
Stadler, M.A. (1992). Statistical structure and implicit serial learning.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 18, 318–327.
Stajkovic, A.D., Locke, E.A., & Blair, E.S. (2006). A ﬁrst examination
of the relationships between primed subconscious goals, assigned
conscious goals, and task performance. Journal of Applied Psychology, 91, 1172–1180.
Stanley, W.B., Mathews, R.C., Buss, R.R., & Kotler-Cope, S. (1989).
Insight without awareness: On the interaction of verbalization,
instruction and practice in a simulated process control task. The
Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Experimental Psychology, 41, 553–577.
Strack, F., & Deutsch, R. (2004). Reﬂective and impulsive determinants of social behavior. Personality and Social Psychology Review, 8, 220–247.
Turk-Browne, N.B., Junge, J., & Scholl, B.J. (2005). The automaticity
of visual statistical learning. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
General, 134, 552–564.

(RECEIVED 6/12/07; REVISION ACCEPTED 8/14/07)

Downloaded from pss.sagepub.com at EMORY UNIV on April 19, 2015

267

