P SY CH OL OG I C AL S CIE N CE

Research Article

Perceptual Mechanisms That
Characterize Gender Differences
in Decoding Women’s Sexual
Intent
Coreen Farris,1 Teresa A. Treat,2 Richard J. Viken,1 and Richard M. McFall1
1

Indiana University and 2Yale University

ABSTRACT—Men

and women often disagree about the
meaning of women’s nonverbal cues, particularly those
conveying dating-relevant information. Men perceive more
sexual intent in women’s behavior than women perceive
or report intending to convey. Although this finding has
been attributed to gender differences in the threshold for
labeling ambiguous cues as sexual in nature, little research
has been conducted to determine etiology. Using a model
that differentiates perceptual sensitivity from decisional
bias, we found no evidence that men have lenient thresholds for perceiving women’s nonverbal behavior as indicating sexual interest. Rather, gender differences were
captured by a relative perceptual insensitivity among men.
Just as in previous studies, men were more likely than
women to misperceive friendliness as sexual interest, but
they also were quite likely to misperceive sexual interest
as friendliness. The results point to the promise of computational models of perception in increasing the understanding of clinically relevant social processes.
Decoding sexual intent is an arguably difficult task, particularly
if the perceiver hopes to decode intent early in an interaction.
Women may smile, sustain eye contact, increase physical proximity, or touch their partner to convey romantic or sexual interest. However, all of these cues also could be used to convey simple
warmth, friendliness, or platonic interest. Given ambiguity
in separating sexual interest from platonic interest and the

Address correspondence to Coreen Farris, Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, Indiana University, 1101 E. 10th St.,
Bloomington, IN 47405, e-mail: cofaris@indiana.edu.

348

overlapping nonverbal cues used to signal these two kinds of
interest, it should come as no surprise that individuals often
disagree about the meaning of nonverbal sexual signals. In
particular, men often disagree with women about the presence
or degree of women’s sexual intent (see Farris, Treat, Viken, &
McFall, 2008, for a review). Men consistently rate female targets
as intending to convey a greater degree of sexual interest than
do women who rate the same targets—a finding that has been
remarkably consistent across studies ranging from those using
still photographs and video vignettes to those using live, unscripted interactions (e.g., Abbey, 1982; Abbey & Melby, 1986;
Shotland & Craig, 1988). This gender difference in ratings of
sexual intent is stable, is readily replicable, and has a medium
effect size (Farris et al., 2008).
The effect is not confined to the lab. In a large survey of
university women, 67% reported that they had experienced an
incident in which a male acquaintance misperceived their
friendliness to be an indication of sexual interest, and 26%
reported that such an event had occurred within the past month
(Abbey, 1987; see also Haselton, 2003). In most cases, the negative consequences of sexual misperception will not extend
beyond minor social discomfort. However, among a subgroup of
individuals, sexual misperception may play an etiological role in
the process that ultimately leads to sexual coercion. Sexually
coercive men are more likely than noncoercive men to report
incidents of sexual misperception (Abbey & McAuslan, 2004;
Abbey, McAuslan, & Ross, 1998). Thus, understanding the etiology of gender differences in perception of sexual intent may provide insight into the origins of this normative effect and also inform efforts aimed at preventing sexual coercion.
Two main theories have been offered to explain the source
of these observed gender differences. The first is a decisional-

Copyright r 2008 Association for Psychological Science

Volume 19—Number 4

C. Farris et al.

threshold (or bias) theory, according to which men require
fewer impelling cues than women before labeling a woman’s
behavior as sexual (Haselton & Nettle, 2006; Koukounas & Letch,
2001; Shotland & Craig, 1988). In this interpretation, men and
women perceive the same positive behavioral cues, but men are
more likely to label those cues as indicative of sexual interest
because they have a more lenient decisional threshold than women
do. Women are assumed to wait for more compelling sexual-interest
cues before being willing to apply the label of sexual interest. It has
been suggested that men may develop lenient thresholds for sexual
interest through socialization processes that encourage men to
be sexually avid and dominant (Abbey, 1982). Evolutionary psychologists have also been strong proponents of a bias interpretation
of gender differences in perception of sexual interest, suggesting
that it would have been sexually adaptive for men to have a low
threshold for detecting probable or even possible mating partners
(Haselton & Buss, 2000).
The second theory regarding the source of the gender difference posits that men misperceive sexual interest not because
they have a low threshold for labeling sexual interest, but rather
because they are less sensitive to women’s nonverbal cues than
women are and find it perceptually difficult to differentiate the
subtle cues that discriminate women’s sexual interest from their
platonic interest (Abbey & Harnish, 1995, p. 298; Farris et al.,
2008). This theory places men’s performance in perception of
sexual interest within the broader context of studies demonstrating that compared with women, men are less sensitive to emotional
signaling across a broad range of affect categories (Hall, 1978;
McClure, 2000). Such insensitivity may be particularly relevant
among young men who are just entering the dating system, and
therefore may not have acquired the experience necessary to
reliably and accurately discriminate between women’s platonicand sexual-interest cues. If differences in sensitivity to intent
describe the perceptual process by which men’s and women’s
judgments come to differ, then one would expect that compared
with women, men would make more decisional errors in both
directions; that is, they not only would be more likely to mistake
women’s friendliness for sexual interest, but also would be more
likely to mistake women’s sexual interest for friendliness.
Despite strong theory and empirical interest in this area, the
underlying source of observed gender differences in sexual
perception has never been empirically measured and tested.
Fortunately, measurement models capable of determining if
gender differences in classification patterns reflect bias differences in decisional thresholds or relative insensitivity to different affective categories can be readily translated from simple
perception applications in cognitive science. In fact, the implementation of these models in clinical cognitive science is part of
a general movement to translate cognitive models in order to be
more quantitatively and theoretically explicit about socially
and clinically relevant processes (e.g., McFall & Treat, 1999;
Neufeld, 2007). Luce’s choice model (Luce, 1959, 1963; Macmillan & Creelman, 2004), closely aligned with the more com-

Volume 19—Number 4

monly utilized signal detection theory (SDT; Green & Swets,
1966), provides a simple, computational model that matches the
current needs of the field. It provides two parameter estimates
that model the perceptual and decisional mechanisms that underlie previously documented gender differences in judgments
about women’s interest. Fitting the model to participants’ identification data provides separate estimates of decisional bias and
perceptual sensitivity for each individual. By collapsing individual estimates across gender, one can assess the separate contributions of bias and sensitivity to the observed gender differences in identification.
In the current study, we sought first to replicate the finding that
men are more likely than women to misperceive women’s
friendliness as sexual interest. Provided this historically stable
empirical result was replicated in our data, we sought to extend
the analysis by modeling the underlying source of the gender
difference using Luce’s (1959) choice model. Given that formal
computational models have never been employed to parse the
source of the gender difference, and given that strong theoretical
context supports both bias and sensitivity explanations, we approached the research from an exploratory perspective, with an
emphasis on methodology capable of uncovering support for one
or both theories. In addition, we examined men’s and women’s
response to women’s negative nonverbal cues in order to provide
a dating-relevant counterpoint that would help clarify the specificity versus generalizability of any gender differences in the
perception of women’s nonverbal cues.
METHOD

Participants
Two hundred eighty heterosexual undergraduate men (63.6%)
and women (36.4%) participated in exchange for course credit.
The sample was predominantly White-Caucasian (85.4%; 3.6%
African American, 5.0% Asian or Asian American, 2.5% Hispanic, 3.6% other), and the average age was 19.6 years (SD 5
1.72).
Identification Task
Seated in a private computer room, participants categorized
each of a series of photo images of women into one of four categories: friendly, sexually interested, sad, or rejecting. Each participant was randomly assigned to view the images for 500 ms or
3,000 ms. The 500-ms presentation time was sufficiently short
to make it challenging to decode all relevant information thoroughly; the 3,000-ms presentation time provided ample opportunity for thorough processing. Participants viewed the images
in four blocks of 70 randomly ordered images, with a 30-s pause
separating successive blocks.
Stimulus Set
Extensive pilot testing produced a set of 280 full-body images of
clothed women displaying one of the four dating-relevant emo-

349

Decoding Women’s Sexual Intent

tions. Initially, a sample of 497 undergraduate men provided
normative ratings of 1,127 images of undergraduate women who
displayed a variety of emotions and wore different clothing
styles. The men used 7-point scales to rate how friendly, sexually
interested, sad, rejecting, attractive, and provocatively dressed
each woman was. Those images rated above the median on the
scales of interest were retained for consideration. From this
group, we selected images such that approximately half of the
retained images were rated above the midpoint for provocative
dress. Note that the women in the photos were instructed to select clothing from their own wardrobes; therefore, the variance
along the clothing-style continuum is representative of the range
of clothing styles that a college student would observe among his
or her peers.
As the final step in generating the photo set, we asked a new
sample of undergraduates (80 men and 80 women) to categorize
the women in the photographs as friendly, sexually interested, sad,
or rejecting. A photograph was retained if the majority of men and
the majority of women categorized the picture into the same affect
group. We used a majority criterion, rather than a strong-consensus criterion, to ensure some variability within each category,
as variability is required to model the theoretically relevant perception parameters. Finally, in selecting the photographs to be
used in the experiment, we examined attractiveness ratings from
the original normative sample and ensured that attractiveness was
held constant across the four target types. The final set of 280
photographs consisted of 70 images in each of the four affect
categories.
Analysis
Choice-model parameters, sensitivity and bias, were estimated
for each participant individually (see Luce, 1959, 1963; Macmillan & Creelman, 2004, pp. 95–97, 247–250). The sensitivity
parameter a provides a quantitative estimate of an observer’s
ability to perceptually distinguish between categories. It is computed as follows:
sﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
Hð1  FAÞ
a¼
;
ð1  HÞFA
where H is the proportion of hits (i.e., the probability of correctly
identifying the target) and FA is the proportion of false alarms
(i.e., the probability of incorrectly identifying a nontarget as
the target). The formula essentially computes a ratio of correct
responses to incorrect responses, and thus the value of alpha increases positively as discrimination improves. This general formula is modified for forced-choice tasks with two or more alternatives, such as the identification task we used. For the current
study, ln(a) was used to estimate sensitivity:
hQ
i
PðRi jSi Þ
ln
PðRj jSi Þ
lnðaÞ ¼ pﬃﬃﬃ
;
2mðm  1Þ

350

where m is the number of response categories, P(Ri|Si) is the
probability of a correct response to stimulus i, and P(Rj|Si) is the
probability of an incorrect response to stimulus i. Ln(a) is zero
when the participant is wholly unable to perceive the category
structure and increases positively as sensitivity improves. In our
stimulus set, near-perfect sensitivity would correspond to an
estimate of 4.63. We calculated four sensitivity estimates, one
corresponding to each of the four affect categories (the participant’s ability to discriminate friendliness from all other categories, sexual interest from all other categories, etc.). Readers
more comfortable interpreting sensitivity within a signal detection framework may find it helpful to approximate the SDT
sensitivity parameter (d 0 ) by dividing ln(a) by 0.81 (Macmillan
& Creelman, 2004).
The bias parameter quantifies an observer’s response preference. The general formula is as follows:
sﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
ð1  HÞð1  FAÞ
:
b¼
HðFAÞ
Thus, b is the ratio of the observer’s tendency to use one response
over another. For identification tasks with more than two response categories, bias can be computed as a ratio between two
response tendencies (Macmillan & Creelman, 2004). We chose
to examine the theoretically relevant pairs friendly versus sexually interested (positive affect) and sad versus rejecting (negative affect). The bias parameter can be thought of as an estimate
of the threshold at which the participant’s categorization of
women’s behavior switches from one category to another. It was
computed as follows:
h
i
  ln Q PðRi jSk Þ
PðRj jSk Þ
bi
ln
;
¼
m
bj
where bi/bj is the ratio of a subject’s bias to provide response i
over his or her bias to provide response j, P(Ri|Sk) is the probability of providing response i to stimulus k, and P(Rj|Sk) is the
probability of providing response j to stimulus k.
For the current study, two decisional-bias estimates were
computed for each participant. Positive-affect bias, ln(bfr|bsi),
refers to the category boundary between friendliness (‘‘fr’’) and
sexual interest (‘‘si’’). A value near zero indicates balanced
category responses (i.e., the participant was no more likely to
respond that positive affect reflected friendliness than to respond that it reflected sexual interest). This estimate becomes
increasingly positive the more likely participants are to indicate
that positive affect reflects friendliness and becomes increasingly negative the more likely participants are to indicate that
positive affect reflects sexual interest. Computing this estimate
allowed us to evaluate the prediction that men would be biased
to perceive sexuality in women’s ambiguous nonverbal behavior.
A significantly lower bias estimate for men than for women
would indicate that men have a lower threshold for perceiving
sexual intent in women’s nonverbal displays.

Volume 19—Number 4

C. Farris et al.

TABLE 1
Confusion Matrix Summarizing Male and Female Participants’ Categorization Accuracy
Participants’ responses (%)
Sexually
interested

Friendly

Sad

Rejecting

Target category

Men

Women

Men

Women

Men

Women

Men

Women

Friendly
Sexually interested
Sad
Rejecting

79.9
37.8
10.3
13.7

87.0
31.9
6.2
10.7

12.1
48.9
5.4
5.3

8.7
59.2
4.8
6.6

3.3
4.6
62.3
23.1

1.8
2.7
68.3
21.1

4.7
8.7
22.0
57.9

2.7
6.3
20.8
61.7

Note. Percentages for correct responses are in boldface.

The second bias estimate captures negative-affect bias,
ln(bsd|brj), or the category boundary between sadness (‘‘sd’’) and
rejection (‘‘rj’’). Negative-affect bias increases positively as
participants become more likely to respond that negative affect
is sadness and declines negatively as participants become more
likely to respond that negative affect is rejection.
In our stimulus set, almost exclusive reliance on one category
response would produce a bias estimate of 6.55 for either
positive-affect bias or negative-affect bias. Relying on one
category for 70% of all judgments, with equally distributed
errors, would produce a bias estimate of 1.95.
Statistical Analysis
A general linear model (GLM) approach was used to explore
gender differences in heterosocial perception as quantified by
the choice-model parameters of sensitivity and bias. We report
models predicting the following dependent variables: (a) positive-affect sensitivity, (b) negative-affect sensitivity, (c) positiveaffect bias, and (d) negative-affect bias. All models included
gender, clothing style (conservative vs. provocative), and presentation time (500 ms vs. 3,000 ms) as predictors. However,
presentation time did not interact significantly with gender in
any of the analyses reported. The sensitivity models also included an affect factor to discriminate the two types of positive affect
(friendliness vs. sexual interest) or negative affect (sadness vs.
rejection).
RESULTS

The confusion matrix in Table 1 provides a descriptive overview
of men’s and women’s categorization of the image set. Note
that for all affect categories, women categorized more images
correctly than men did. Of course, inaccuracy is the effect of
specific interest, particularly in the set of images normatively
judged to portray friendliness, as misclassification of friendly
women as sexually interested has been the primary area of
interest in previous research. As in prior studies, men were more
likely than women to misidentify friendly targets as indicating
sexual interest (12.1% vs. 8.7%), t(271.4) 5 3.39, p < .01,

Volume 19—Number 4

d 5 0.38.1 If this error were due to a tendency to oversexualize
the image set, men should also have been more accurate than
women at decoding the cues of sexually interested targets. However, Table 1 reveals the opposite; men were more likely than
women to misidentify sexually interested targets as indicating
friendliness (37.8% vs. 31.9%), t(287) 5 3.03, p < .01, d 5 0.40.
The statistical model predicting choice-model parameter estimates of sensitivity to positive affect parsed the source of this
descriptive evidence. Compared with women (ln(a) 5 2.30),
men (ln(a) 5 1.61) were significantly less sensitive to the distinction between friendliness and sexual interest, F(1, 278) 5
123.38, p < .001, Zp 2 ¼ :326. The main effect for gender was
modified by a three-way interaction among gender, clothing
style, and affect, F(1, 278) 5 7.46, p < .01, Zp 2 ¼ :026, depicted in Figure 1. Post hoc analyses revealed that both men and
women were more sensitive to cues signaling friendliness than to
cues signaling sexual interest (Tukey’s HSD, p < .01). However,
perceptual sensitivity varied as a function of clothing style
among men only. The provocativeness of target women’s clothing
was not associated with men’s sensitivity to friendliness; however, when a target woman was signaling sexual interest, men
were more sensitive to her nonverbal cues when she was dressed
provocatively (ln(a) 5 1.39), rather than conservatively (ln(a) 5
0.86, p < .01).
Gender differences in sensitivity also characterized decoding
of women’s negative-affect cues. Compared with women (ln(a) 5
1.68), men (ln(a) 5 1.36) were less sensitive to target women’s
sad and rejecting nonverbal cues, F(1, 278) 5 33.28, p < .001,
Zp 2 ¼ :107. The two-way interaction between gender and affect
(sad vs. rejecting), F(1, 278) 5 9.62, p < .01, Zp 2 ¼ :033, was
significant. However, post hoc tests did not reveal significant
differences between men’s differential sensitivity to sad (ln(a) 5
1.43) versus rejecting (ln(a) 5 1.28) affect and women’s

1
Given that the primary aim of this study was to explore the source of observed gender differences in heterosocial perception, only those effects that
involve gender are reported here. In a previous publication (Farris, Viken,
Treat, & McFall, 2006), we reported significant experimental effects independent of gender in the men’s sample.

351

Decoding Women’s Sexual Intent

3.5

Conservatively Dressed
Provocatively Dressed

2.5
2
1.5
1
0.5
0
Friendly

Sexually Interested

Target Category
3.5

Conservatively Dressed
Provocatively Dressed

3
Sensitivity

2
Positive-Affect Bias

Sensitivity

3

Conservatively Dressed
Provocatively Dressed

1.5
1
0.5
0
Men

Women

–0.5
Fig. 2. Mean estimates of positive-affect bias as a function of the participant’s gender and the target’s clothing style. Error bars represent
95% confidence intervals, computed according to Masson and Loftus’s
(2003) recommendations for between- and within-subjects designs.

2.5
2

did men, ln(bsd|brj) 5 0.365 versus 0.125, respectively.
Women were more likely than men to respond that target women’s negative affect indicated rejection, rather than sadness.

1.5
1
0.5
0

DISCUSSION

Friendly

Sexually Interested

Target Category
Fig. 1. Mean sensitivity to friendliness and sexual interest as a function
of the target’s clothing style, for men (top panel) and women (bottom
panel). Error bars represent 95% confidence intervals, computed according to Masson and Loftus’s (2003) recommendations for between- and
within-subjects designs.

differential sensitivity to sad (ln(a) 5 1.89) versus rejecting
(ln(a) 5 1.47) affect.
A separate GLM predicting choice-model positive-affect bias
estimates was estimated. The analyses revealed that men and
women had nearly identical thresholds for labeling positive
affect sexual interest, ln(bfr|bsi) 5 0.94 vs. 0.88, respectively,
F(1, 278) 5 0.323, p 5 .57. The positive values of the parameter
estimates indicate that both men and women were biased to
assume that positive affect was friendliness, rather than sexual interest (within this image set). A significant interaction between gender and clothing style, F(1, 278) 5 22.49, p < .001,
Zp 2 ¼ :075, depicted in Figure 2, revealed that women modified
their decisional criterion for detecting sexual interest on the
basis of clothing style (Tukey’s HSD, p < .01). They adopted a
more lenient criterion for labeling positive affect sexual interest
when target women were dressed provocatively and a more stringent criterion when target women were dressed conservatively.
The same pattern was reflected in men’s decisional processes,
but was not significant in post hoc analyses.
Finally, the statistical model predicting choice-model negative-affect bias estimates revealed a main effect for gender only,
F(1, 278) 5 6.45, p < .05, Zp 2 ¼ :023. Women had a lower
decisional threshold for labeling negative affect rejection than

352

The present evaluation of gender differences in perception of
sexual intent replicated the long-standing finding that men are
more likely than women to misperceive sexual intent in women’s
displays of friendliness and showed that gender differences in
perceptual sensitivity accounted for this result. Men found
platonic-interest cues to be less discriminable from sexual-interest cues than women did. Just as in previous research, they
made some mistakes in perceiving sexual intent in friendly
displays, but they also misperceived friendliness in sexual-interest displays. That is, they oversexualized some women, but
were quite likely to undersexualize other women. Although the
methodology varied from that used in early research (we employed an identification paradigm and a series of photographs),
the effect sizes (d 5 0.38–0.40) were consistent in magnitude
with the average effect sizes reported in previous investigations
(Farris et al., 2008). Employing a model-based approach capable of parsing decisional bias from perceptual insensitivity,
we found no evidence that men’s performance differed from
women’s because of a gender difference in decisional thresholds
for positive-affect targets. Relative to women, men did not oversexualize the image set, and their decisional criteria for detecting sexual intent were no more or less lenient than women’s.
For this image set, the underlying etiology differentiating men’s
performance from women’s performance was perceptual sensitivity.
In the case of negative affect, men also showed a relative
insensitivity to nonverbal cues. Women were more sensitive than
men to the distinction between sadness and rejection; however,
the effect size for the gender difference in sensitivity was larger within positive-affect categories than within negative-affect

Volume 19—Number 4

C. Farris et al.

categories (.326 vs. .107, respectively). This might suggest that
although there is a general tendency for women to be more
successful than men at decoding nonverbal cues (Hall, 1978;
McClure, 2000), there is a particularly pronounced gender difference when nonverbal cues are sexual in nature. Future research that will continue to explore the magnitude and the boundaries of gender differences in social perception is warranted. In
any case, within the realm of sexual bargaining, and sexual
coercion in particular, skill in decoding sexual intent may be
principally crucial in successfully negotiating sexual relationships, and warrants continued attention.
It is important to note that participants in this study were
asked to judge affect from relatively impoverished stimuli. Social and sexual communication often occurs in a dynamic and
reciprocal interchange between actors. Over time, perceivers
may accumulate information about a potential partner’s interest
in order to change or refine interpretation of that person’s behavior. It will be important for future research to explore gender
differences in bias and sensitivity in response to richer stimuli,
such as videotaped vignettes or scripted, live interactions, in
order to establish whether gender differences in sensitivity
generalize to such stimuli (and whether gender differences in
bias come into play). At the same time, first-impression judgments, such as those captured in responses to briefly displayed
still photographs, may also influence social perception across
longer time scales, and thus merit continued consideration.
Finally, the question remains as to how to resolve the lack of
gender differences in the bias parameter with women’s observations of their own social interactions. Women self-report many
incidents in which their attempts to be friendly are misperceived
as displays of sexual interest (Abbey, 1987), but do not seem to
have the opposite problem of displaying sexual interest only to
have it ignored as mere friendliness (Haselton, 2003). If men
misperceive positive-affect cues more often than women because of greater insensitivity, should they not take sexual interest to be friendliness as often as they take friendliness to be
sexual interest? Are the unequal frequencies of reports of the
two types of misperception an indicator that men have a relative
bias in the natural environment, even if they fail to display that
bias in the laboratory?
We believe that women’s self-reports do not challenge the
laboratory findings for several reasons. First, women’s observations about misperception of their intent would be reliable only
if women had access to the internal perceptual and decisional
processes of their social partners, but this is an unlikely assumption. Instead, women probably rely on men’s behavioral
cues to infer men’s perception of interest. The behavioral cues
that suggest a man has misperceived friendliness as sexual interest are more likely to be inappropriate and memorable than
the cues that suggest a man has misperceived sexual interest as
friendliness. Indeed, a man who has misperceived sexual intent
as friendliness may not provide any diagnostic behavior cues
(failure to pursue could be an indicator of misperception, but

Volume 19—Number 4

could just as easily be explained by noninterest). Thus, women
may note misperceived friendliness more readily than misperceived sexual interest.
Second, the behavioral cues often attributed to misperceived
friendliness (e.g., continued advances) may not be produced
solely by misperception, but may also be produced after a man
accurately perceives noninterest but continues to approach in
order to convince, cajole, or persuade. Finally, and most important, base rates must be considered before concluding that
observed frequencies of misperceived friendliness versus misperceived sexual interest reflect bias (Dawes, 1986). Base rates
of friendliness and sexual interest in the natural environment are
likely to be widely discrepant. A woman may have dozens if not
hundreds of friendly interactions with men for every one interaction in which she signals sexual interest. Thus, there are many
more opportunities for insensitivity to be exposed (and noted by
women) within friendly interactions than within interactions
characterized by sexual interest. Women’s reports of experiencing misperception of friendliness more frequently than misperception of sexual interest are not inconsistent with gender differences in sensitivity, and may be explained by the unequal base
rates of women’s use of friendliness and sexual-interest cues.
In summary, parameter estimates provide preliminary support
for the argument that disagreements between men and women
about the meaning of women’s positive-affect displays are the
result of a perceptual difference such that men have more
difficulty discriminating sexual interest from friendliness, rather
than the result of a tendency among men to oversexualize
women’s nonverbal displays. By relying on rigorous, computational modeling techniques, the measurement strategy for the
present study was well matched to the theoretical question of
interest and made it possible to parse the perceptual and decisional processes hypothesized to underlie the observed disagreement between men and women.
Acknowledgments—This research was supported by grants
from the National Institute of Mental Health (T32-MH17146)
and National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism (F31AA016055).
REFERENCES
Abbey, A. (1982). Sex differences in attributions for friendly behavior:
Do males misperceive females’ friendliness? Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 42, 830–838.
Abbey, A. (1987). Misperceptions of friendly behavior as sexual interest: A survey of naturally occurring incidents. Psychology of
Women Quarterly, 11, 173–194.
Abbey, A., & Harnish, R.J. (1995). Perception of sexual intent: The
role of gender, alcohol consumption, and rape supportive attitudes. Sex Roles, 32, 297–313.
Abbey, A., & McAuslan, P. (2004). A longitudinal examination of male
college students’ perception of sexual assault. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 72, 747–756.

353

Decoding Women’s Sexual Intent

Abbey, A., McAuslan, P., & Ross, L.T. (1998). Sexual assault perpetration by college men: The role of alcohol, misperception of
sexual intent, and sexual beliefs and experiences. Journal of
Social and Clinical Psychology, 17, 167–195.
Abbey, A., & Melby, C. (1986). The effects of nonverbal cues on
gender differences in perceptions of sexual intent. Sex Roles, 15,
283–297.
Dawes, R.M. (1986). Representative thinking in clinical judgment.
Clinical Psychology Review, 6, 425–441.
Farris, C., Treat, T.A., Viken, R.J., & McFall, R.M. (2008). Sexual
coercion and the misperception of sexual intent. Clinical Psychology Review, 28, 48–66.
Farris, C., Viken, R., Treat, T., & McFall, R. (2006). Heterosocial
perceptual organization: Application of the choice model to sexual coercion. Psychological Science, 17, 869–875.
Green, D.M., & Swets, J.A. (1966). Signal detection theory and psychophysics. New York: Wiley.
Hall, J.A. (1978). Gender effects in decoding nonverbal cues. Psychological Bulletin, 85, 845–857.
Haselton, M.G. (2003). The sexual overperception bias: Evidence of a
systematic bias in men from survey of naturally occurring events.
Journal of Research in Personality, 37, 34–47.
Haselton, M.G., & Buss, D.M. (2000). Error management theory: A
new perspective on cross-sex mind reading. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 78, 81–91.
Haselton, M.G., & Nettle, D. (2006). The paranoid optimist: An integrative evolutionary model of cognitive biases. Personality and
Social Psychology Review, 10, 47–66.

354

Koukounas, E., & Letch, N.M. (2001). Psychological correlates of
perception of sexual intent in women. The Journal of Social
Psychology, 141, 443–456.
Luce, R.D. (1959). Individual choice behavior. New York: Wiley.
Luce, R.D. (1963). Detection and recognition. In R.D. Luce, R.R.
Bush, & E. Galanter (Eds.), Handbook of mathematical psychology (Vol. 1, pp. 103–189). New York: Wiley.
Macmillan, N.A., & Creelman, C.D. (2004). Detection theory: A user’s
guide. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Masson, M.E.J., & Loftus, G.R. (2003). Using confidence intervals for
graphically based data interpretation. Canadian Journal of Experimental Psychology, 57, 203–220.
McClure, E.B. (2000). A meta-analytic review of sex differences in
facial expression processing and their development in infants,
children, and adolescents. Psychological Bulletin, 126, 424–453.
McFall, R.M., & Treat, T.A. (1999). Quantifying the information value
of clinical assessments with Signal Detection Theory. Annual
Review of Psychology, 50, 215–241.
Neufeld, R.W.J. (Ed.). (2007). Advances in clinical cognitive science:
Formal modeling of processes and symptoms. Washington, DC:
American Psychological Association.
Shotland, R.L., & Craig, J.M. (1988). Can men and women differentiate between friendly and sexually interested behavior? Social
Psychology Quarterly, 51, 66–73.

(RECEIVED 5/17/07; REVISION ACCEPTED 9/19/07)

Volume 19—Number 4

