PS YC HOLOGICA L SC IENCE

Research Article

Temporal Selection Is
Suppressed, Delayed, and
Diffused During the Attentional
Blink
Edward Vul, Mark Nieuwenstein, and Nancy Kanwisher
Department of Brain and Cognitive Science, Massachusetts Institute of Technology

ABSTRACT—How

does temporal selection work, and along
what dimensions does it vary from one instance to the next?
We explored these questions using a phenomenon in which
temporal selection goes awry. In the attentional blink,
subjects fail to report the second of a pair of targets (T1
and T2) when they are presented at stimulus onset asynchronies (SOAs) of roughly 200 to 500 ms. We directly
tested the properties of temporal selection during the blink
by analyzing distractor intrusions at a fast rate of item
presentation. Our analysis shows that attentional selection
is (a) suppressed, (b) delayed, and (c) diffused in time
during the attentional blink. These effects are dissociated
by their time course: The measure of each effect returns to
the baseline value at a different SOA. Our results constrain
theories of the attentional blink and indicate that temporal
selection varies along at least three dissociable dimensions:
efficacy, latency, and precision.

Selective attention is the process of choosing a subset of the
sensory input for detailed perceptual analysis. Although most
research on attention has focused on the ability to select locations in space and the objects that occupy them, people can also
select moments in time and the events that unfold over them. In
the experiment reported here, we investigated the nature of
temporal selection by testing a case in which it goes awry: the
attentional blink (AB).

Mark Nieuwenstein is now at the Department of Cognitive Psychology, Vrije Universiteit, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. Address correspondence to Edward Vul, Department of Brain and Cognitive
Science, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 77 Massachusetts
Ave. 46-4141, Cambridge, MA 02139, e-mail: evul@mit.edu.

Volume 19—Number 1

The selection of a single item from a rapid serial visual presentation (RSVP) sequence can be modeled as the operation of a
linear system: In such a model, attention is a gate that can be
described as a spatiotemporal cue-impulse response function
(Reeves & Sperling, 1986; Shih & Sperling, 2002). This function
can be characterized empirically by noting which items from the
visual stream are reported given a particular cue (Botella,
Arend, & Suero, 2004; Botella, Garcia, & Barriopedro, 1992);
from this information, one can infer the temporal and spatial
extent of selection (Reeves & Sperling, 1986; Shih & Sperling,
2002; Weichselgartner & Sperling, 1987). In the more complex
case in which two targets (T1 and T2) must be selected in rapid
succession (within 200–500 ms of each other), observers often
miss the second, a phenomenon known as the AB (Raymond,
Shapiro, & Arnell, 1992). Most research on the AB has not
characterized the temporal profile of selection of T2, but has
instead simply reported the conditions under which T2 is reported correctly (Chun & Potter, 1995; Raymond, Shapiro, &
Arnell, 1995; but see Botella et al., 2004, and Chun, 1997a).
Despite a recent demonstration that the AB reflects a failure of
selection rather than memory (Nieuwenstein & Potter, 2006),
single-item models of selection have not generally been applied
to the AB, which has instead been interpreted within symbolicprocessing models (Chun, 1997b; Chun & Potter, 1995) as a
limit in type-token binding (Bowman & Wyble, 2007; Kanwisher, 1987) or as a broader processing constraint on attention
(Di Lollo, Kawahara, Shahab Ghorashi, & Enns, 2005). To
bridge the two research traditions, we measured the extent of
temporal selection during the AB by applying the methods of
single-item temporal selection to AB conditions.
We considered three dimensions of temporal selection in order to examine how it is altered for T2 to produce the AB. Selection could be less effective (i.e., suppressed; see Fig. 1a),

Copyright r 2008 Association for Psychological Science

55

Changes to Temporal Selection

meaning that fewer items in the vicinity of the target are selected. This would result in a concomitant increase in the rate of
random guessing (observable in more frequent reports of items
from remote serial positions in the stimulus sequence). This
scenario is consistent with several accounts of the AB (Olivers,
van der Stigchel, & Hulleman, 2007; Raymond et al., 1992).
Alternatively, or in addition, the time of engagement of selection
could be less accurate (e.g., delayed; see Fig. 1b), meaning that
subjects systematically report letters from incorrect temporal
positions. This scenario is consistent with another group of AB
theories (Chun, 1997a; Chun & Potter, 1995; Nieuwenstein,
Chun, van der Lubbe, & Hooge, 2005). Finally, temporal selection could be less precise, or spread out over time (i.e., diffused; see Fig. 1c), so that subjects reliably report letters further
in time from the cue. In the limit, of course, diffusion and suppression would produce identical patterns of reports (equally

frequent guesses from all list positions), but the two possibilities
differ outside this limiting case.
Because each stimulus letter occurred in only one list position
in each RSVP sequence of our experiment, the serial position of
any reported letter was known. Therefore, we were able to precisely measure all three dimensions of temporal selection as a
function of the stimulus onset asynchrony (SOA) between T1 and
T2. We found that all three dimensions of selection are altered at
short SOAs: Selection of T2 is suppressed, delayed, and diffused. Moreover, these three changes are dissociable by their
time courses: Diffusion lasts about 400 ms after T1, suppression
lasts about 500 ms, and delay persists for longer than 800 ms.
Our data are not consistent with the published accounts of the
AB, none of which entail multiple processes with different time
courses. More broadly, our findings reveal that temporal selection can vary along three independent dimensions: efficacy,
latency, and precision.
METHOD

Participants
Twelve participants (7 female, 5 male) between the ages of 18
and 35 were recruited from the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology subject pool and were paid for participation.
Materials
On each trial, subjects saw an RSVP stream composed of one
instance of each of the 26 English letters in a random order.
Each letter was presented for 25 ms and was followed by a 58.3ms blank, resulting in an RSVP rate of 12 items/s. The letters
were white, uppercase, and in 48-point Courier font. They were
presented on a black background. With our resolution (1024 
768), monitor (Viewsonic G90f), and viewing distance (roughly
50 cm), the letters subtended roughly 2.51 of visual angle.
On each trial, two cues in the RSVP stream indicated which of
the letters were targets. The cues were white annuli with an inner
diameter of 2.81 and an outer diameter of 3.21; thus, they appeared
as rings around the cued letters. When a cue appeared, it was
shown for 25 ms, concurrently with the target letter (see Fig. 2).
Onset of the first cue (T1 onset) was randomly counterbalanced to occur equally often in Positions 6 through 10 in the
RSVP stream. The delay between the first and second cues (T1T2 SOA) was manipulated over 10 levels, from 1 to 10 items (83–
833 ms).
The experiment was programmed in Psychophysics Toolbox
(Brainard, 1997; Matlab 7, Windows XP).

Fig. 1. Illustration of the three ways in which temporal selection may
change during the attentional blink: (a) suppression, (b) delay, and (c)
diffusion. Each graph shows the probability of an item being reported as a
function of the item’s position in the stimulus stream.

56

Procedure
Each participant began the experiment with 2 practice trials that
had a randomly selected T1-T2 SOA; the results of these trials
were discarded. Following the practice trials, participants completed four blocks of 100 trials each.

Volume 19—Number 1

Edward Vul, Mark Nieuwenstein, and Nancy Kanwisher

Fig. 2. Experimental design. On a given trial, all 26 English letters were
presented in a random order without repetition. Annulus cues were
presented simultaneously with the 2 letters designated as targets (T1 and
T2). Subjects were asked to report the identities of the 2 cued letters in
order. Stimulus onset asynchrony (SOA) varied across trials.

Each block contained 2 instances of each of the 50 possible
combinations of T1 onset (five levels: Positions 6–10) and T1-T2
SOA (10 levels: SOAs of 1–10 items). For instance, in a trial with
T1 onset at Position 6 and a T1-T2 SOA of 4 items, the two cues
would appear during the 6th and 10th items in the sequence.
These conditions appeared in a random order within each block.
At the end of each trial, subjects were asked to indicate which
two letters they thought had been cued by the annuli. Subjects
reported the letters by pressing the corresponding keys on the
computer keyboard. Duplicate letters were not accepted, and
subjects were told to report the first letter first and the second
letter second. After each trial, subjects were told how many
points they had earned (1 point possible for each target). In
addition to receiving the flat rate of $10 for participation, participants were offered bonus cash awards for performance: $0.01
for each letter reported correctly (on average, subjects reported
about 200 letters correctly, receiving a $2 bonus). This bonus
was provided as an incentive for subjects to try to report the cued
letters correctly, given the particularly difficult conditions.
RESULTS

Our analyses are all based on the serial position of the reported
letters at different T1-T2 SOAs. We computed the distribution of
reports for T1 from the first responses and the distribution of
reports for T2 from the letters reported second. Figure 3 shows
the distribution of the serial position of responses for all of the
SOA conditions (1–10 items), shifted to the onset of the first cue.
The distribution of letters reported for T1 (see Fig. 3a) was unaffected by the T1-T2 SOA, indicating that the AB indeed affects the attentional response to the second cue only. The
familiar curve of T2 accuracy in the AB is clear for both T2

Volume 19—Number 1

report and T2 report when T1 was reported correctly (the thick
black lines in Figs. 3b and 3c, respectively). Lag-1 sparing is
more clearly seen in the latter case, presumably because the
constraint that T1 be correct excludes trials that contain swap
errors, known to occur commonly when T2 follows T1 in quick
succession (Chun & Potter, 1995). Otherwise, the distribution of
T2 reports was the same on trials when T1 was reported as item
2, 1, 0, 1, or 2, which indicates that it was the cue—the
initialization of the selection episode—not which item was reported, that determined the latency between T1 and T2 that produced the AB.
As did Chun (1997a), we saw many posttarget intrusion errors
in the T2 reports. However, our data contained substantially
more posttarget intrusions, and the distance of the intrusions
from the target was greater than Chun found, presumably because of the faster RSVP rate we used. Indeed, at SOAs of three,
four, five, and six items, the posttarget item was reported more
often than the target itself, and intrusions from distractors two or
more serial positions after T2 were also substantially increased
above chance. The increase in posttarget intrusions at a higher
RSVP rate suggests that the observed effects of delay reflect a
delay in time, rather than serial position.
As described in the introduction, the properties of selection
around each target can be estimated from the distribution of
reported letters. We estimated efficacy of selection as the average probability of reporting an item from a seven-item window
around the target (spanning three items before to three items
after the target1). This efficacy measure (see the appendix) is
independent of delay and diffusion, as it does not depend on
which item is reported (the target or earlier or later items within
the window). If selection were totally ineffective, such that the
cues had no effect on which items were reported, this quantity
would correspond to chance (1/26 for T1 and 1/25 for T2: .0385
and .04, respectively). If the cues were so effective that only
items from within this window were reported, this quantity would
be 1/7, or .1429. The degree to which this efficacy measure is
lower for T2 than for T1 is the degree to which selection is
suppressed (rendered less effective) because of the AB.
Figure 4a shows efficacy as a function of SOA for both T1 and
T2 report. It is clear that reports were above chance (close to
ceiling for T1). However, for T2, a trend corresponding to the AB
curve is evident. During the AB window (SOAs of 166–417 ms),
there was a clear drop in the probability of reporting an item from
the window around the target. Efficacy was greater at an SOA of
83.3 ms (a finding that reflects some lag-1 sparing), and recovered to T1 levels at an SOA of 500 ms. These results show that
1
Varying the size of the window within a reasonable range did not result in
qualitative changes to the results. Also, note that given a limited measurement
window, there is a possibility that delay and suppression are not orthogonal
measures: If delay is so great that subjects report items well outside the window,
then our measure of suppression will reflect this change. We chose our selection
window to capture all of the items around each target that were reported at
above-chance frequencies, thus ensuring that all the effects of delay and suppression were captured within the window, and were thus orthogonal.

57

Changes to Temporal Selection

Fig. 3. Probability of reporting a letter from a particular position in the rapid serial visual presentation stream. Results are shown separately for (a) the first target (T1), (b) the second target (T2),
and (c) T2 given that T1 was reported correctly. The thick black lines in (b) and (c) indicate the
probability of accurate T2 report as a function of stimulus onset asynchrony (SOA). Item position is
normalized to T1 (i.e., T1 is always at x 5 0).

58

Volume 19—Number 1

Edward Vul, Mark Nieuwenstein, and Nancy Kanwisher

Fig. 4. Results for the three selection-window measures: (a) average
probability of reporting an item within the seven-item selection window
around the target (suppression), (b) center of mass of reports in the
window around the target (delay), and (c) variance of the center of mass
in the window around the target (diffusion). Each measure is shown as a
function of stimulus onset asynchrony (SOA) between the two targets. All
error bars correspond to 1 SEM.

during the AB, not only T2 itself, but also other items around T2,
are less likely to be seen and reported. The AB is not caused
simply by elevated levels of posttarget intrusions, because even
those intrusions are less frequent during the AB than at SOAs
outside the range of the AB. Instead, selection is less effective
during the blink. An attempt to select letters from the RSVP
stream yields fewer educated guesses: Selection is suppressed,
and subjects resort to greater levels of random guessing.
The second relevant metric of temporal selection is its latency,
which we estimated as the center of mass of reports in the window around a given target. This measure (originally employed by
Chun, 1997a) corresponds to the average reported serial position, relative to the target (see the appendix), and is independent
of both the efficacy and the precision of selection. Nonzero
values of the center of mass correspond to systematic inaccuracies of selection: A positive center of mass means subjects

Volume 19—Number 1

were more likely to report items that followed the target than
items preceding the target, whereas a negative center of mass
means subjects were more likely to report items preceding the
target than those following the target. If the center of mass is
more positive for T2 than T1, this indicates that selection is
delayed for T2, relative to T1.
Figure 4b plots this measure of delay for T1 and T2 reports as
functions of SOA. At short SOAs (83, 167 ms), the center of mass
for T2 reports was negative, indicating that items before the
target were reported more often than items after the target; this
may have occurred because items between T1 and T2 benefit
from the imprecise selection of both targets and are thus reported more often than other items. The negative center of mass
for T2 reports at short SOAs became a delay (relative to the
center of mass for T1 reports) at SOAs greater than 250 ms. This
result indicates a substantial shift to a pattern of posttarget intrusions. The delay of selection persisted longer than the suppression of selection, as the measure of delay did not return to T1
levels in any of the SOAs we investigated (up to 833 ms). At the
long SOAs, we found a slowly decaying exponential trend, extrapolation of which suggests that subtle traces of delay may last
as long as 2 s. Given that items were separated by 83.3 ms, we
were able to compute the delay of the center of mass in time.
These calculations revealed that selection was delayed by
roughly 75 ms at an SOA of 417 ms and was still delayed by
about 30 ms at the longest SOA we measured (833 ms).
A third metric of selection is the precision of selection around
the center of mass. This can be measured by the variance of the
center of mass of reported items (see the appendix). Figure 4c
displays this measure as a function of SOA for T1 and T2 report.
The time course of the variance in the position of T2 report was
different from that for both delay and suppression: Variance was
much greater for T2 than for T1 at SOAs of 167, 250, and 333 ms,
but this difference was gone by 417 ms. Because in the limit,
suppression and diffusion yield identical distributions of report,
we checked that our measure of diffusion does not merely reflect
a side effect of suppression. By estimating the level of random
guessing (i.e., the probability of reporting items from serial
positions distant from the target), we could correct for the effects
of suppression; this correction resulted in no qualitative changes
to the reported results.
To assess whether the three measures of selection follow
different time courses, we first conducted an analysis of variance
with the factors of SOA (1–10 items), measure (efficacy, latency,
or precision), and target (1 or 2). All effects and interactions
were significant at a p value of .0001; most important, the threeway interaction was highly significant, F(18, 660) 5 16.31, p <
.00001. Of course, the three-way linear interaction is not the
most rigorous test of the claim that the three effects follow
different time courses, because relationships between measures
are not expected to be linear. The essence of our hypothesis is
that each of the three measures takes a different amount of time
(in terms of SOA) to return to T1 levels. Thus, we could rigor-

59

Changes to Temporal Selection

ously test this claim with pair-wise comparisons of the time
courses of the three effects. First, suppression and diffusion
recovered to T1 levels long before the maximal SOA (833 ms);
however, delay was still significantly greater for T2 than for T1 at
this lag, t(11) 5 5.98, p < .0001. Second, we tested the less
obvious time-course difference between suppression and
diffusion. To test the claim that diffusion recovered to T1 levels
earlier than suppression, for each subject we found the first SOA
greater than 1 item at which each measure did not differ between
T2 and T1. We then ran a t test on the values of these SOAs
across subjects. Just as the graphs suggest, this statistic showed
a significant difference between the two measures: Diffusion
recovered earlier than suppression, t(11) 5 2.7, p < .05.
Thus, all three measures of selection—corresponding to efficacy, latency, and precision—change when two selection
episodes interact. Under normal AB conditions, selection is
delayed, diffused, and suppressed (see Fig. 1). Each of these
effects alone would diminish the probability of reporting T2;
however, as normally measured, the AB reflects all three effects.
Furthermore, given that each of these effects follows a different
time course, they are likely to emerge from separate processes,
which may be independently affected by manipulations known
to alter T2 report.

DISCUSSION

We analyzed the pattern of distractor intrusions around two
targets from an RSVP stream and showed that the occurrence of
a first selection episode causes suppression, delay, and diffusion
of selection during a second episode. These three effects are
dissociable by their time courses. Our results indicate that although the three effects have a common cause (proximity of two
temporal-selection episodes), they reflect different processes
that combine to form the commonly reported AB.
The delay effect we obtained replicates Chun’s (1997a) results,
showing that during the AB, intrusions from posttarget items are
elevated. At the faster RSVP rate we employed, this effect was
amplified, which indicates that the delay of selection is a function
of time, rather than number of items. Because our faster RSVP
rate provided a more sensitive measure of the distribution of intrusions, we could compare the time courses of the delay, suppression, and diffusion of selection. This analysis revealed that
the delay effect disappears more slowly than does the suppression
effect, which persists longer than the diffusion effect.
These findings cannot be accounted for in terms of the mechanisms currently proposed for the AB. In some circumstances,
suppression may cause a delay in the center of mass, but suppression alone cannot account for the finding that delay and
diffusion follow different time courses. One possible way to account
for these data would be to assume that suppression has an effect at
multiple levels of the visual system (Visser, Williams, Cunnington,
& Mattingley, 2005). Such a mechanism of suppression, accom-

60

panied by a particular pattern of processing delays between visual
areas might result in the particular time courses of delay and
diffusion we observed. A key goal for future research will be to
determine if a central modulatory mechanism with a single time
course could result in the three different time courses we observed
by affecting multiple stages of the visual hierarchy, or if multiple
mechanisms must be invoked to account for these data.
More broadly, these data inform current understanding of
temporal selection in general: Proposed models of selection in
time (Reeves & Sperling, 1986; Shih & Sperling, 2002) explain
selection and patterns of reports in a linear-system framework.
However, our data show massive nonlinearities (namely, delay
and diffusion) when two selection episodes interact. In the linear-system framework, these changes to the profile of temporal
selection can be described as changes to the attentional-gate
impulse response function as a function of SOA. Given that such
a dynamic-systems account of vision seems to be generally
promising, another key step for future research will be to modify
the linear model to account for these temporal nonlinearities.
In sum, our results suggest that two proximal episodes of
temporal selection interact nonlinearly such that the second selection episode is rendered (a) less effective (suppressed), (b)
systematically delayed, and (c) less precise (diffused). We showed
that these three effects are dissociable by their time courses.
These findings pose a challenge to theories of the AB. Further, our
results provide new insights about the fundamental nature of
temporal selection by showing that it varies along at least three
independent dimensions: efficacy, latency, and precision.

Acknowledgments—This work was supported by National Eye
Institute Grant 13455 to N. Kanwisher. We thank Adam Love
and Brian Coffey for assistance running the experiment.

REFERENCES
Botella, J., Arend, I., & Suero, M. (2004). Illusory conjunctions in the
time domain and the resulting time course of the attentional
blink. Spanish Journal of Psychology, 7, 63–68.
Botella, J., Garcia, M.L., & Barriopedro, M. (1992). Intrusion patterns
in rapid serial visual presentation tasks with two response dimensions. Perception & Psychophysics, 52, 547–552.
Bowman, H., & Wyble, B. (2007). The simultaneous type, serial token
model of temporal attention and working memory. Psychological
Review, 114, 38–70.
Brainard, D.H. (1997). The Psychophysics Toolbox. Spatial Vision, 10,
433–436.
Chun, M.M. (1997a). Temporal binding errors are redistributed by the
attentional blink. Perception & Psychophysics, 59, 1191–1199.
Chun, M.M. (1997b). Types and tokens in visual processing: A double
dissociation between the attentional blink and repetition blindness. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance, 23, 738–755.

Volume 19—Number 1

Edward Vul, Mark Nieuwenstein, and Nancy Kanwisher

Chun, M.M., & Potter, M.C. (1995). A two-stage model for multiple
target detection in rapid serial visual presentation. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance,
21, 109–127.
Di Lollo, V., Kawahara, J., Shahab Ghorashi, S.M., & Enns, J.T. (2005).
The attentional blink: Resource depletion or temporary loss of
control? Psychological Research, 69, 191–200.
Kanwisher, N.G. (1987). Repetition blindness: Type recognition
without token individuation. Cognition, 27, 117–143.
Nieuwenstein, M.R., Chun, M.M., van der Lubbe, R.H., & Hooge, I.T.
(2005). Delayed attentional engagement in the attentional blink.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance, 31, 1463–1475.
Nieuwenstein, M.R., & Potter, M.C. (2006). Temporal limits of selection and memory encoding: A comparison of whole versus partial
report in rapid serial visual presentation. Psychological Science,
17, 471–475.
Olivers, C.N., van der Stigchel, S., & Hulleman, J. (2007). Spreading
the sparing: Against a limited-capacity account of the attentional
blink. Psychological Research, 71, 126–139.
Raymond, J.E., Shapiro, K.L., & Arnell, K.M. (1992). Temporary
suppression of visual processing in an RSVP task: An attentional
blink? Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception
and Performance, 18, 849–860.
Raymond, J.E., Shapiro, K.L., & Arnell, K.M. (1995). Similarity determines the attentional blink. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 21, 653–662.
Reeves, A., & Sperling, G. (1986). Attention gating in short-term visual memory. Psychological Review, 93, 180–206.
Shih, S.I., & Sperling, G. (2002). Measuring and modeling the trajectory
of visual spatial attention. Psychological Review, 109, 260–305.
Visser, T.A., Williams, M.A., Cunnington, R., & Mattingley, J.B. (2005,
May). Activation of visual areas during the attentional blink: An
fMRI investigation. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the
Cognitive Neuroscience Society, New York.

Volume 19—Number 1

Weichselgartner, E., & Sperling, G. (1987). Dynamics of automatic and
controlled visual attention. Science, 238, 778–780.
(RECEIVED 3/2/07; REVISION ACCEPTED 6/9/07)

APPENDIX: EQUATIONS USED

We calculated A, the average probability of report (efficacy of
selection: our measure of suppression), as follows:
ke
P
Pi
A ¼ i¼ks ;
n
where n is the total number of items in the selection window (in
our case, 7), Pi is the probability (empirical frequency) of reporting an item from serial position i (relative to the target position, 0), and ks and ke are the lower and upper bounds,
respectively, of the window used to compute the measure, expressed in serial position of the item relative to the cue position.
We used ks 5 3 and ke 5 3 (0 is the correct target).
C, the center of mass (latency of selection: our measure of
delay), was calculated as
ke
P
Pi  i
i¼ks
:
C¼
An
Finally, V, the variance of the center of mass (precision of selection: our measure of diffusion), was calculated as
ke
P
Pi  ði  CÞ2
i¼ks
V¼
:
An

61

