PS YC HOLOGICA L SC IENCE

Research Article

Toward a Physiology of
Dual-Process Reasoning
and Judgment
Lemonade, Willpower, and Expensive Rule-Based Analysis
E.J. Masicampo and Roy F. Baumeister
Florida State University

ABSTRACT—This

experiment used the attraction effect to
test the hypothesis that ingestion of sugar can reduce reliance on intuitive, heuristic-based decision making. In the
attraction effect, a difﬁcult choice between two options is
swayed by the presence of a seemingly irrelevant ‘‘decoy’’
option. We replicated this effect and the ﬁnding that the
effect increases when people have depleted their mental
resources performing a previous self-control task. Our hypothesis was based on the assumption that effortful processes require and consume relatively large amounts of
glucose (brain fuel), and that this use of glucose is why
people use heuristic strategies after exerting self-control.
Before performing any tasks, some participants drank
lemonade sweetened with sugar, which restores blood glucose,
whereas others drank lemonade containing a sugar substitute. Only lemonade with sugar reduced the attraction
effect. These results show one way in which the body (blood
glucose) interacts with the mind (self-control and reliance
on heuristics).
The capacity for rational choice based on intelligent analysis
and reasoning is one of the most remarkable and distinctive
attributes of the human mind. But human decision making does
not always adopt such high levels of analysis. Many of the
choices people make are quick and effortless, and people’s
decisions are often based on previously established heuristics,
rather than a thorough application of the strict rules of logic.
This inconsistency in human reasoning has been explained

Address correspondence to E.J. Masicampo, Department of Psychology, Florida State University, Tallahassee, FL 32306-4301, e-mail:
masicampo@psy.fsu.edu.

Volume 19—Number 3

through dual-process accounts of decision making. According to
these accounts, one reasoning process makes quick and automatic judgments based on associative and intuitive feedback,
and the other process is more effortful and relies on the application of normative rules of reasoning. That judgment outcomes
vary across contexts is said to be, in part, a reﬂection of these
complementary systems.
In the present research, we sought to establish psychological
and physiological causes for the reliance on one decision-making
process over the other. Speciﬁcally, we tested the hypothesis that
more blood glucose (which serves as fuel for the brain) is needed
for the effortful, rule-based process than for the less effortful
process, so that the former type of decision making is impaired
when glucose has been depleted by prior, even irrelevant, activities. For our test, we used a speciﬁc pattern of intuitive, heuristicbased decision making that has been identiﬁed in previous work.
We sought to show (a) that the inﬂuence of this heuristic is increased when cognitive resources, presumably including blood
glucose, have been depleted by prior acts of self-control and (b)
that effortful processing can be increased (and the reliance on
heuristics reduced) by administering a snack that restores blood
glucose to its normal levels.
TWO DECISION SYSTEMS

Several accounts have analyzed human reasoning into two
complementary processes. Epstein (1994) proposed that information processing is executed by an experiential system that is
holistic, affective, and associationistic and by a rational system
that is analytical, logical, and reason oriented. Sloman (1996)
described two similar systems: an associative system based on
automatic intuition and a rule-based system based on deliberation and the manipulation of symbols. More recently, Stanovich

Copyrightfrom
rpss.sagepub.com
2008 Association
for Psychological
Downloaded
at UCSF
LIBRARY & CKM Science
on March 10, 2015

255

Decision Making and Glucose

(1999; and later, Kahneman, 2003) described the two processes
as a heuristic- and association-based process, referred to as
System 1, and a controlled, rule-based process, referred to as
System 2. Common to all these models of reasoning is the idea
that one of these systems (System 2) is more effortful and rule
based, whereas the other (System 1) is relatively effortless and
relies on quick associations and heuristics.
Theories of reasoning differ in their descriptions of the relative adaptiveness of the two systems. For example, early work
charting the limitations of human rationality described the heuristic-based System 1 process as both biased and prone to systematic error (Kahneman, Slovic, & Tversky, 1982). Furthermore, Kahneman (2003) proposed that one major purpose of the
rule-based System 2 process is to monitor System 1 decisions
and to correct them when they are in error. Alternative accounts
have characterized System 1 processes as providing a fast and
frugal substitute for expensive System 2 thinking (Gigerenzer &
Goldstein, 1996), and, indeed, some evidence suggests that the
role of intuitive, heuristic strategies is to usurp effortful, analytical processes over time, so that comparable beneﬁts can be
achieved with much less effort (Reyna & Ellis, 1994).
The aim of the current study was not to compare the adaptive
value of the two reasoning systems, but to examine a potential
asymmetry in the demands that they exert. We proposed that the
effortful System 2 process requires access to limited psychological and physiological resources, and we anticipated that
when we manipulated the availability of these resources in a
decision-making context, we would observe concordant changes
in System 1 versus System 2 processing.

THE ATTRACTION EFFECT

Huber, Payne, and Puto (1982; also Simonson, 1989) identiﬁed a
useful procedure for studying the different reasoning processes.
In their study, some participants faced a difﬁcult decision between two options that traded off on important, relevant dimensions. Other participants faced a choice between those same
two options plus a third, ‘‘decoy’’ option. The decoy option resembled one of the others but was inferior to it in every respect.
Logically, participants should have ruled out the decoy, which
would have left them facing the same two options as in the
basic, two-option version of the dilemma. Thus, their choices
should have exactly paralleled those of the participants who had
only those two options to begin with. The researchers found,
however, that even though no one chose the decoy, participants
came to favor whichever of the original options was similar to
the decoy. In other words, the decoy exerted an irrational
bias (attraction) on the two prime options. This phenomenon
is called the attraction effect or the asymmetric dominance
effect.
Because the attraction effect exerts a seemingly irrational
inﬂuence on the decision process, its impact on choice can be

256

seen as working through the intuitive System 1 process rather
than the rule-based System 2 process. Indeed, Dhar and Simonson (2003) concluded that the attraction effect operates
primarily through intuitive and perceptual System 1 processes,
and recent ﬁndings have suggested that when cognitive (System
2) resources are low, the attraction effect tends to be increased
(Pocheptsova, Amir, Dhar, & Baumeister, 2007). Furthermore,
work by Simonson (1989) suggests that the attraction effect
serves as a likely tiebreaker when thorough, effortful analysis
fails to produce a clear preference. Thus, the attraction effect is
greatest when analytical System 2 processes fail and the decision-making process defers to System 1.

DEPLETED RESOURCES AND BLOOD GLUCOSE

Research on self-regulation and the self’s executive function has
established that they rely on a limited resource. Early studies
found that after people engaged in one act of self-control, their
performance on subsequent and seemingly irrelevant self-control tasks was impaired (Baumeister, Bratslavsky, Muraven, &
Tice, 1998; Muraven, Tice, & Baumeister, 1998). These ﬁndings
suggested that some resource needed for optimal control on the
second task had been depleted during the ﬁrst task.
The limited resource used for self-control is also used for
effortful decision making. Vohs et al. (2007) showed that making
multiple or difﬁcult decisions led to subsequent decrements in
self-control, as if the same vital resource was needed for both
kinds of tasks. In an unpublished study, Pocheptsova et al.
(2007) reversed this procedure to assess the effects of acts of
self-control on subsequent decision making. They found that
heuristic-based decision-making processes, including those
that drive the attraction effect, were signiﬁcantly stronger among
depleted participants than among those who were not depleted.
These ﬁndings support the argument that System 1 processes
gain increased inﬂuence when scarce cognitive resources do not
allow for optimal System 2 reasoning.
What is the nature of the resource that is depleted? The lay term
willpower has a long history, but has not generally been accorded
much respect in psychological theorizing. Gailliot and Baumeister
(2007) proposed that willpower is more than a metaphor and that
blood glucose may be an important physiological basis for it.
Glucose is fuel that is consumed to provide energy for all brain
activities, but some brain processes consume much more energy
than others. A series of studies by Gailliot et al. (2007) showed that
blood glucose levels dropped when people performed laboratory
tasks that required self-control (but not neutral tasks) and that
these low levels of blood glucose were signiﬁcantly correlated with
poor performance on subsequent behavioral measures of selfcontrol. These studies also showed that replenishing blood glucose
with a drink containing sugar counteracted the depletion and restored self-control performance to a good level, whereas sugar-free
diet drinks had no such effect.

Downloaded from pss.sagepub.com at UCSF LIBRARY & CKM on March 10, 2015

Volume 19—Number 3

E.J. Masicampo and Roy F. Baumeister

THE PRESENT RESEARCH

In the present experiment, we sought to provide evidence for a
causal relation between blood glucose and effortful (System 2)
decision processes. To do this, we applied the resource-depletion
and glucose-snack manipulations to participants who then confronted the attraction problem. We sought, ﬁrst, to replicate the
attraction effect (Huber et al., 1982), in which the presence of a
decoy option (that hardly anyone would actually choose) sways
preferences between the other two options. In addition, we sought
to replicate the ﬁnding that ego depletion, caused by prior exertion of self-control on a seemingly irrelevant task, intensiﬁes
the attraction effect (cf. Pocheptsova et al., 2007). To manipulate
depletion, we adapted a procedure originally developed by Gilbert, Krull, and Pelham (1988). In this procedure, participants
watch a silent video depicting a woman talking while a series of
words ﬂashes on the screen. In one condition, participants are
instructed to avoid looking at the words, and if they do ﬁnd
themselves looking at the words, they are to bring their attention
immediately back to focus on the woman. This task requires the
deliberate control of attention and therefore should deplete the
limited resources (i.e., willpower and glucose) needed for selfcontrol and other System 2 activities. Other participants watch
the same video without any special instructions.
The prime goal of this work was to test our novel hypothesis
that blood glucose reduces the attraction effect and restores
effortful decision making. To do this, we adapted the glucose
manipulation used by Gailliot et al. (2007). All participants
drank a glass of lemonade, which by random assignment had
been sweetened with either sugar or Splenda. The latter is a sugar
substitute that tastes like real sugar (especially in lemonade). For
present purposes, the key is that Splenda does not contribute
anything to blood glucose. To the extent that effortful choice
requires blood glucose, Splenda should not restore the necessary
resources for effortful thought as effectively as sugar does.
Our main prediction was therefore that the attraction effect would
be stronger among depleted participants (i.e., those who had performed a previous task requiring self-control) who drank lemonade
made with Splenda. We reasoned that their blood glucose levels
would have been reduced by the prior act of self-control, and that
lemonade made with Splenda would be useless for raising those
levels back to normal. In contrast, we predicted that participants
who were depleted but then consumed sugar would be restored to a
normal level of blood glucose and therefore would be less prone to
rely on the heuristic, low-effort decision-making style.
We also included conditions in which nondepleted participants drank either kind of lemonade. Our prediction was that
when blood glucose was already at a normal level, there would
be no beneﬁt to be gained from consuming additional sugar, and
so the type of lemonade would make no difference. These participants would show at best a weak attraction effect. But if
the type of lemonade had some effect on decision making other
than by counteracting depletion, we would be able to ﬁnd that

Volume 19—Number 3

effect by examining the choices made by these nondepleted
participants.

Method
Participants
One hundred twenty-one participants took part in the experiment in exchange for partial credit in their psychology course.
Data from 1 participant were lost because of computer problems.
Procedure
Participants had been told that the study dealt with two separate
issues, namely, food preferences and impression formation.
They were told they would ﬁrst drink and rate a beverage and
then form an impression of someone by watching a video.
After giving informed consent, participants were randomly
assigned to receive a lemonade beverage that had been sweetened with either sugar (glucose condition) or Splenda (placebo
condition). The lemonade was administered ﬁrst because it
takes time (10–12 min) for glucose to be absorbed into the
bloodstream. Neither the experimenter nor the participant was
aware of which sweetener had been used. The experimenter then
left the room while participants rated the drink for quality of
taste, pleasantness, and how difﬁcult it was to drink. A 4-min
period was allocated for these ratings (partly to allow time for the
glucose to be metabolized). Participants were instructed to sit
quietly after completing the ratings and to await the experimenter’s return.
After 4 min, the experimenter returned and gave participants
instructions for the impression-formation task. Participants
were told that they would watch a 6-min video (without sound) of
a woman being interviewed by an off-camera interviewer.
The experimenter said that the research was aimed at elucidating how people interpret nonverbal behaviors. As the woman
was interviewed, the video displayed a series of common words
(e.g., shoe) for 10 s each. These words appeared in black text in a
white box in the lower portion of the screen. By random assignment, half the participants were instructed not to read or
look at any of the words (depletion condition). If they caught
themselves looking at the words, they were supposed to redirect
their gaze immediately to the woman. The other half of the
participants were given no such instructions (no-depletion
condition).
After participants watched the video, they completed the Brief
Mood Introspection Scale (BMIS; Mayer & Gaschke, 1988).
The combination of the 4-min lemonade manipulation, the
6-min video, and the BMIS ensured that more than 10 min had
elapsed since participants drank the lemonade, so we assumed
that by the time they completed the BMIS, the sugar was metabolized and was therefore becoming available as glucose in the
bloodstream. Hence, at this point, we administered the primary
dependent measure.

Downloaded from pss.sagepub.com at UCSF LIBRARY & CKM on March 10, 2015

257

Decision Making and Glucose

Participants were told that the procedure required some time
to pass before they rated their impression of the woman in the
video. In the meantime, they were asked to pretest a consumer
decision task for another study. This task was taken from research by Pocheptsova et al. (2007). Instructions printed on a
sheet of paper told participants to imagine that they were
searching for a new apartment for the coming school year. They
were to choose among three options. All participants saw the
main options B and C, plus one of two decoys, A or D. Table 1
shows all four options. Decoy A resembles B but is inferior to it
on both dimensions, whereas decoy D resembles C and is inferior on both dimensions.
After the decision task, the experimenter explained that the
participants would not be rating their impressions of the woman
in the video. Instead, participants were debriefed regarding the
true nature of the study. They were thanked for their participation, awarded partial course credit, and dismissed from the lab.

Results
Apartment Choice
The experiment had a 2 (glucose vs. placebo)  2 (depletion vs.
no depletion)  2 (ABC vs. BCD array of options) betweensubjects design. The attributes for each apartment option, the
choice frequency for each cell, and the magnitudes of the attraction effect are summarized in Table 1. It was assumed
(correctly) that no one would select either decoy, so the dependent measure in the following analyses was the binary choice
between B and C. The attraction effect is seen in the difference
in preferences for B versus C as a function of which decoy (A or
D) is present. A one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) indicated signiﬁcant variation among conditions, F(7, 112) 5 3.67,
prep 5 .99, Zp 2 ¼ :187. Our main prediction was that the attraction effect would be larger among depleted participants who
received the placebo than among participants in the other three
groups (depletion plus sugar, no depletion plus sugar, no depletion plus placebo). We tested this prediction using a focused
interaction contrast pitting the depletion-plus-placebo condition against the combination of the other three conditions. This

interaction was signiﬁcant, F(1, 111) 5 5.311, prep 5 .92,
Zp 2 ¼ :045.
ANOVA also revealed a main effect of which apartment set
participants saw, F(1, 119) 5 15.13, prep > .99, Zp 2 ¼ :119.
Participants who saw the ABC array were more likely to choose
B than those who saw the BCD array. Thus, the basic attraction
effect was replicated across all conditions, although the interaction qualiﬁed it. The experiment also replicated the ﬁnding
(Pocheptsova et al., 2007) that ego depletion increases the effect. That is, a planned complex comparison (excluding the
depletion-plus-glucose group) indicated a signiﬁcant interaction between depletion and apartment set, F(1, 112) 5 3.83,
prep 5 .87, Zp 2 ¼ :033. A pair-wise comparison between the
depletion-plus-placebo group and the no-depletion-plus-placebo
groups did not reach signiﬁcance, F(1, 112) 5 2.66, prep 5 .81,
Zp 2 ¼ :023.
Furthermore, within the depletion condition, the interaction
between beverage and apartment set was signiﬁcant, F(1, 112) 5
5.07, prep 5 .92, Zp 2 ¼ :043, such that the glucose group
exhibited a smaller attraction effect than the placebo group. The
interaction contrast comparing the magnitude of the attraction
effect for the depletion-plus-glucose group and the no-depletion-plus-glucose group was not signiﬁcant, F(1, 112) 5 0.294,
prep 5 .44, Zp 2 ¼ :003; this ﬁnding supports the hypothesis that
glucose intake eliminates the effect of ego depletion on decision
making and restores effortful choice.
Beverage Ratings
We created a liking index by summing each participant’s ratings
of the quality of the taste of the beverage, the pleasantness of the
beverage, and how difﬁcult it was to drink (reverse-scored). A
one-way ANOVA yielded a marginally signiﬁcant effect of
beverage type on liking, F(1, 119) 5 3.47, prep 5 .86, Zp 2 ¼
:029, indicating a trend toward liking the lemonade with sugar
(M 5 14.92, SD 5 3.74) more than the Splenda version (M 5
13.61, SD 5 3.94). Liking for the beverage did not correlate
signiﬁcantly with apartment choice, r 5 .138, prep 5 .78, nor did
it interact with the depletion manipulation to predict apartment
choice, F < 1, n.s.

TABLE 1
Choice Frequencies in Each Condition
No-depletion condition
Glucose
Apartment
A: 350 sq ft, 10 miles
B: 450 sq ft, 7 miles
C: 800 sq ft, 15 miles
D: 700 sq ft, 18 miles
Percentage choice of B: [B/(B 1 C)]
Magnitude of attraction effect: %B – %C

Depletion condition

Splenda

Glucose

Splenda

ABC set

BCD set

ABC set

BCD set

ABC set

BCD set

ABC set

BCD set

0
9
4
—
69.2

—
7
7
0
50.0

0
12
1
—
92.3

—
8
5
0
61.5

0
9
5
—
64.3

—
10
10
0
50.0

0
19
1
—
95.0

—
4
9
0
30.8

19.2

30.8

14.3

64.2

Note. Each participant chose from among three options—B and C plus either A or D. The apartments varied in both size and distance from the school.

258

Downloaded from pss.sagepub.com at UCSF LIBRARY & CKM on March 10, 2015

Volume 19—Number 3

E.J. Masicampo and Roy F. Baumeister

Furthermore, none of the hypothesized effects were eliminated when we controlled for the liking index—in fact, they grew
stronger. The one-way analysis of covariance (ANCOVA)
on apartment choice, with beverage liking as a covariate, indicated signiﬁcant variation among conditions, F(8, 111) 5 4.025,
prep > .99, Zp 2 ¼ :225, and the factorial ANCOVA replicated
the attraction effect, yielding a main effect for apartment set on
apartment choice, F(1, 119) 5 17.02, prep > .99, Zp 2 ¼ :133.
The focused interaction contrast pitting the depletion-plusplacebo condition against the other three conditions remained
signiﬁcant, F(1, 111) 5 5.57, prep 5 .93, Zp 2 ¼ :048, which
suggests that the attraction effect was strongest among depleted
participants who received the placebo beverage. Complex
comparisons demonstrated that participants in the depletionplus-placebo condition exhibited a signiﬁcantly larger attraction effect than participants in the no-depletion conditions, F(1,
111) 5 4.24, prep 5 .89, Zp 2 ¼ :037; this ﬁnding supports the
idea that ego depletion increases reliance on heuristic processing. Furthermore, within the depletion condition, the interaction between beverage and apartment set remained signiﬁcant, F(1, 112) 5 4.85, prep 5 .91, Zp 2 ¼ :042; administration
of a glucose beverage signiﬁcantly decreased the attraction effect for participants who were required to control their attention.
Mood
A two-way ANOVA indicated that the interaction between the
depletion manipulation and the beverage manipulation had no
signiﬁcant effect on the valence, F < 1, n.s., or arousal, F < 1,
n.s., of participants’ mood, as measured by the BMIS. In addition, the manipulations did not have main effects on either valence or arousal, all Fs < 1, n.s.
DISCUSSION

We set out to elucidate the interplay of mind and body in decision making. The simple and seemingly unrelated act of drinking a beverage sweetened with sugar restored the capacity for
effortful, System 2 reasoning and decreased reliance on heuristic-based System 1 reasoning, thereby decreasing the observed
attraction effect.
In recent years, most interest in the mind-body interface has
focused on the brain, but the brain depends on the body for its
fuel. Speciﬁcally, brain processes use energy from glucose in the
bloodstream. Although all brain activities require some of that
fuel, some activities are much more expensive than others in the
sense that they consume a notable amount of the supply and
therefore deplete what is left in the blood. Recent work has
indicated that self-control is one such expensive process
(Gailliot et al., 2007). The present work suggests that effortful
decision making is another process that draws heavily on the
same resource. Most important, we showed that the outcome of a
decision process could be changed by manipulations aimed at
increasing or decreasing the available supply of blood glucose.

Volume 19—Number 3

Many dual-process models of reasoning posit that expensive
and effortful choice is a key criterion for distinguishing between
modes of decision making (e.g., Gigerenzer & Goldstein, 1996;
Kahneman, 2003; Reyna & Ellis, 1994), and the current data are
consistent with this view. Previous work on self-control suggests
that the feature common to expensive (and hence depleting)
cognitive processes is that they require active and effortful
guidance by the self, usually to select between many potential
thoughts, rules, or behaviors (Baumeister et al., 1998). If System
2 reasoning strategies share a limited resource with self-control,
then it is plausible that System 2 decision making may be deﬁned by a similar deliberation by the self. Thus, System 2 decision making may involve analyses that are expensive and
effortful, and that enable people to choose between multiple
options.
Alternative models of reasoning have characterized System 2
processes primarily as logical (De Neys, 2006; Epstein, 1994) or
based on the application of rules (Sloman, 1996). To modify such
models, we propose that the difference between rule- or logicbased processes and heuristic-based processes may be meaningful only when the former involve effortful choice. In decisionmaking contexts in which the conclusions or the means for
obtaining them have been previously established (thereby obviating choice), an application of normative rules is more likely
to resemble heuristic strategies than the effortful and analytical
strategies that rely on blood glucose. For example, long division
requires an application of the normative rules of math and logic,
but the rules to be applied have been predetermined. Therefore,
the methods for long division and similar rule-of-thumb processes are not likely to exert the same demands as effortful forms
of rule-based choice. The proper complement to heuristic-based
processing may be not rule-based processing per se, but rather
the effortful rule-based processing that is required for making
novel decisions. It is perhaps only the latter type of decision
making that one can expect to be impaired when cognitive resources are scarce or need to be conserved.
Furthermore, the current data may speak to the relationship
between the two systems of decision making. We found that
heuristic inﬂuence was more prevalent when physiological resources were low than when they were at baseline levels. Thus,
although some models have described the development of decision making as progress away from expensive analysis and
toward more efﬁcient, intuitive strategies (Reyna & Ellis, 1994),
heuristics may not usurp System 2 processes completely. The
current ﬁndings suggest that as heuristics form, they may serve
as a default strategy, rather than as a blanket replacement for
costly System 2 thinking. This idea is consistent with Kahneman’s (2003) view of System 2 as a monitor of System 1 output.
Although System 1 decisions are the default, System 2 processes
may override System 1 processes when their conclusions are
undesirable. According to this view, a lack of System 2 resources
should not affect heuristic processing when heuristics produce
perfectly sound conclusions, which some models of decision

Downloaded from pss.sagepub.com at UCSF LIBRARY & CKM on March 10, 2015

259

Decision Making and Glucose

making suggest they generally do (e.g., Gigerenzer & Goldstein,
1996; Reyna & Ellis, 1994). But when a heuristic can be seen as
irrelevant or irrational, as happens in the case of the attraction
effect in the current study, its inﬂuence will be conditional upon
whether cognitive resources are at an adequate level for System
2 processes to override it.
Acknowledgments—We are grateful to the Templeton Foundation for funding this project. We thank Matt Gailliot and Lauren Brewer for technical assistance and Leigh Anne Shelton,
Lauren Meyer, Jennifer Adkins, and Julie Kaplan for help with
data collection.
REFERENCES
Baumeister, R.F., Bratslavsky, E., Muraven, M., & Tice, D.M. (1998).
Ego depletion: Is the active self a limited resource? Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 74, 1252–1265.
De Neys, W. (2006). Dual processing in reasoning: Two systems but
one reasoner. Psychological Science, 17, 428–433.
Dhar, R., & Simonson, I. (2003). The effect of forced choice on choice.
Journal of Marketing Research, 45, 146–160.
Epstein, S. (1994). Integration of the cognitive and the psychodynamic
unconscious. American Psychologist, 49, 709–724.
Gailliot, M.T., & Baumeister, R.F. (2007). The physiology of willpower:
Linking blood-glucose to self-control. Personality and Social
Psychology Review, 11, 303–327.
Gailliot, M.T., Baumeister, R.F., DeWall, C.N., Maner, J.K., Plant,
E.A., Tice, D.M., et al. (2007). Self-control relies on glucose as a
limited energy source: Willpower is more than a metaphor.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 92, 325–336.
Gigerenzer, G., & Goldstein, D.G. (1996). Reasoning the fast and
frugal way: Models of bounded rationality. Psychological Review,
103, 650–669.

260

Gilbert, D.T., Krull, D.S., & Pelham, B.W. (1988). Of thoughts unspoken: Social inference and the self-regulation of behavior.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 55, 685–694.
Huber, J., Payne, J.W., & Puto, C. (1982). Adding asymmetrically
dominated alternatives: Violations of regularity and the similarity
hypothesis. Journal of Consumer Research, 9, 90–98.
Kahneman, D. (2003). A perspective on judgment and choice: Mapping bounded rationality. American Psychologist, 58, 697–720.
Kahneman, D., Slovic, P., & Tversky, A. (1982). Judgment under uncertainty: Heuristics and biases. Cambridge, England: Cambridge
University Press.
Mayer, J.D., & Gaschke, Y.N. (1988). The experience and meta-experience of mood. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
55, 102–111.
Muraven, M., Tice, D.M., & Baumeister, R.F. (1998). Self-control as
limited resource: Regulatory depletion patterns. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 74, 774–789.
Pocheptsova, A., Amir, O., Dhar, R., & Baumeister, R.F. (2007). Deciding without resources: Psychological depletion and choice in
context. Manuscript submitted for publication.
Reyna, V.F., & Ellis, S.C. (1994). Fuzzy-trace theory and framing effects in children’s risky decision making. Psychological Science,
5, 275–279.
Simonson, I. (1989). Choice based on reasons: The case of attraction
and compromise effects. Journal of Consumer Research, 16, 158–
174.
Sloman, S.A. (1996). The empirical case for two systems of reasoning.
Psychological Bulletin, 119, 3–22.
Stanovich, K.E. (1999). Who is rational? Studies of individual differences in reasoning. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Vohs, K.D., Baumeister, R.F., Nelson, N.M., Rawn, C.D., Twenge, J.M.,
Schmeichel, B.J., & Tice, D.M. (2007). Making choices impairs
subsequent self-control: A limited resource account of decision
making, self-regulation, and active initiative. Manuscript submitted for publication.
(RECEIVED 4/6/07; REVISION ACCEPTED 8/13/07)

Downloaded from pss.sagepub.com at UCSF LIBRARY & CKM on March 10, 2015

Volume 19—Number 3

