PS YC HOLOGICA L SC IENCE

Research Report

Errors Are Aversive
Defensive Motivation and the Error-Related Negativity
Greg Hajcak and Dan Foti
Stony Brook University

ABSTRACT—The

error-related negativity (ERN) is a negative deﬂection in the event-related potential that is maximal approximately 50 ms after the commission of an error.
The ERN is generated in the anterior cingulate cortex, a
region of the medial prefrontal cortex implicated in both
cognitive and emotional processing. Affective and motivational variables inﬂuence the magnitude of the ERN,
which suggests that the ERN may relate to emotional or
motivational aspects of error detection. In the present
study, we evaluated the possibility that errors prime defensive motivational responses, and that the ERN may
predict the magnitude of defensive reactivity after errors.
We found that (a) the defensive startle response was larger
following errors than following correct responses, and (b)
the magnitude of the ERN predicted the degree of startle
potentiation following errors. Thus, response errors prime
defensive motivation—and the ERN predicts individual
differences in the aversive response to errors.
Research on error processing has grown over the past 15 years,
in part because of the discovery of the error-related negativity
(ERN; Falkenstein, Hohnsbein, Hoormann, & Blanke, 1991;
Gehring, Coles, Meyer, & Donchin, 1995). The ERN is a sharp
negative deﬂection in the event-related potential (ERP) that
peaks approximately 50 ms after an unintended response (Falkenstein, Hoormann, Christ, & Hohnsbein, 2000). The ERN is
maximal over fronto-central recording sites, and evidence from
source localization (Holroyd, Dien, & Coles, 1998), intracerebral recording (Brazdil, 2005), and magnetoencephalography
(Miltner et al., 2003) indicates that the ERN is generated in the
anterior cingulate cortex (ACC). The ACC is richly interconnected with both limbic and prefrontal areas of the brain, and is
ideally situated to respond to, and integrate, cognitive and affective information (Bush, Luu, & Posner, 2000).

Address correspondence to Greg Hajcak, Department of Psychology,
Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, NY 11794-2500, e-mail: greg.
hajcak@stonybrook.edu.

Volume 19—Number 2

Although the ERN is known to occur immediately following
the commission of an error, there remains considerable debate
as to its functional signiﬁcance and the speciﬁc process it
indexes. Computational models suggest that the ERN reﬂects
either the coactivation of erroneous and error-correcting
responses (conﬂict theory; Yeung, Cohen, & Botvinick, 2004) or
the evaluation, based on expectations developed during learning
history, that events are worse than anticipated (reinforcementlearning theory; Holroyd & Coles, 2002). Both the conﬂict and
reinforcement-learning theories, then, highlight speciﬁc cognitive functions subserved by the ACC in their conceptualization of the ERN.
Given the involvement of the ACC in pain, depressed mood,
and other distressed states, Luu, Collins, and Tucker (2000)
proposed that the ERN may signify affective processing in response to errors. In fact, there is ample evidence that the ERN
can be modulated by motivational and affective variables (cf.
Hajcak, Moser, Yeung, & Simons, 2005). In between-groups designs, individuals with obsessive-compulsive disorder (Gehring,
Himle, & Nisenson, 2000; Hajcak, Franklin, Foa, & Simons, in
press; Hajcak & Simons, 2002), depression (Chiu & Deldin,
2007), and more generalized anxiety (Hajcak, McDonald, &
Simons, 2003a, 2004) have exhibited increased ERNs compared with control participants—a ﬁnding consistent with the
notion that affective psychopathology is associated with hyperresponsivity to negative information. Other studies have suggested a possible relation between the ERN and individual
differences in punishment sensitivity (Boksem, Tops, Wester,
Meijman, & Lorist, 2006; Dikman & Allen, 2000). It is important to note that most of these results cannot be accounted for
simply by differences in error rates and reaction time, and they
suggest that the ERN varies as a function of motivational states
and traits.
In a broader context, errors are maladaptive responses that
may place an organism in danger and threaten its safety. It
stands to reason that error detection should prompt defensive
motivation—and rapidly activate those reﬂexes and dispositions
toward action that protect the organism (Gray, 1994). To date,
however, there has been no demonstration of a direct link

Copyright
rfrom
2008
Association for
Psychological
Science
Downloaded
pss.sagepub.com
at KAI
NAN UNIV on March
7, 2015

103

Startle and the Error-Related Negativity

between errors and defensive motivation. Although errors
prompt heart rate deceleration and skin conductance responses
(Hajcak, McDonald, & Simons, 2003b, 2004), this pattern of
autonomic reactivity is consistent with either an orienting or a
defensive response to errors (Cook & Turpin, 1997).
The human startle response, in contrast, is a well-validated
and speciﬁc measure of defensive activation (Lang, 1993; Lang,
Davis, & Öhman, 2000). The startle response is a reﬂex in which
the body contracts into a defensive posture and is typically
measured in humans by recording blink magnitude from the
obicularis oculi in response to a sudden and loud acoustic probe.
The magnitude of the startle response can be modulated by
aversive stimuli and settings: Startle is potentiated when participants view threatening stimuli (Bradley, Codispoti, & Lang,
2006; Bradley, Moulder, & Lang, 2005; Lang et al., 2000) and
when they anticipate an electric shock (Curtin, Patrick, Lang,
Cacioppo, & Birbaume, 2001; Grillon, Ameli, Merikangas,
Woods, & Davis, 1993). These ﬁndings are consistent with the
notion that aversive stimuli prime defensive reﬂexes.
In the present study, we sought to determine whether defensive responding would similarly be increased following errors,
compared with correct responses. To evaluate this possibility, we
measured the human startle response 300 ms following errors
and correct responses. We hypothesized that startle responses
would be larger after errors than after correct responses. To
evaluate the role of startle predictability, we included both
predictable and unpredictable startle probes on correct trials.
Additionally, we simultaneously measured error-related brain
activity to determine whether individuals with larger ERNs
would demonstrate greater startle potentiation following errors.
If the ERN reﬂects a motivationally relevant correlate of error
processing, larger ERNs should predict greater startle potentiation following errors.
METHOD

Thirty-one undergraduate students (26 male, 5 female) participated in this study. No participants discontinued their participation in the experiment once it had begun, and all received
course credit for their participation.
The task was an arrow version of the ﬂankers task (cf. Hajcak
et al., 2005). On each trial, ﬁve horizontally aligned arrowheads
were presented, and participants had to respond to the direction
of the central arrowhead by pressing the left or right mouse
button. On compatible trials, all ﬁve arrowheads pointed in the
same direction (either left or right), and on incompatible trials,
the central arrowhead pointed in the direction opposite the direction of the ﬂanking arrowheads. Compatible and incompatible trials were equally frequent, and all stimuli were presented
for 200 ms with an intertrial interval that varied randomly from
500 to 1,000 ms. Participants performed eight blocks of 30
trials. At the end of each block, participants received performance feedback designed to encourage fast and accurate re-

104

sponding. If performance was 75% correct or lower, the message
‘‘Please try to be more accurate’’ was displayed; performance
above 90% correct was followed by ‘‘Please try to respond
faster’’; if performance was between these levels, the message
‘‘You’re doing a great job’’ was displayed. All participants performed one practice block of 30 trials.
The startle response was measured using standard procedures
for assessing defensive reactivity (Bradley et al., 2005, 2006;
Curtin et al., 2001; Grillon et al., 1993; Lang et al., 2000): Startle
was elicited with a 105-dB burst of white noise that had a 50-ms
duration and instantaneous rise time. The startle probe was
delivered on 10% of all trials in the practice block; in the actual
experiment, startle probes were presented on 50% of error trials,
on 50% of correct trials that followed errors, and on a random 4%
of other correct trials. Thus, some startle probes were predictable (after both errors and correct trials that followed errors),
whereas others were not (randomly selected correct trials). Accordingly, there were three trial types: error trials, predictable
correct trials (i.e., correct trials on which the startle probe was
predictable), and unpredictable correct trials (i.e., correct trials
on which the startle probe was not predictable). In all cases, the
startle probe was presented 300 ms after the response.
Continuous electroencephalographic (EEG) and electromyographic (EMG) activity was recorded using an ActiveTwo head
cap and the ActiveTwo BioSemi system (BioSemi, Amsterdam,
The Netherlands). Recordings were taken from 64 scalp electrodes based on the ten-twenty system, as well as from two
electrodes placed on the left and right mastoids. The electrooculogram (EOG) generated from blinks and eye movements was
recorded from four facial electrodes: two approximately 1 cm
above and below the participant’s right eye, one approximately 1
cm to the left of the left eye, and one approximately 1 cm to the
right of the right eye. The startle response was measured with
two electrodes placed approximately 12 mm apart under the
participant’s left eye on the obicularis muscle. As per BioSemi’s
design, the ground electrode during acquisition was formed by
the Common Mode Sense active electrode and the Driven Right
Leg passive electrode. All bioelectric signals were digitized on a
laboratory microcomputer using ActiView software (BioSemi).
Sampling was at 1024 Hz.
Off-line analysis was performed using Brain Vision Analyzer
software (Brain Products, Gilching, Germany). For the startle
data, EMG activity was band-pass ﬁltered (28–512 Hz; 24 dB/
octave roll-off), rectiﬁed, then low-pass ﬁltered at 30 Hz (24 dB/
octave) and baseline-corrected. Individual trials were examined
and rejected if the startle reﬂex began less than 20 ms following
probe onset. The number of excluded startle trials was 1.42
(SD 5 1.43) for predictable correct trials, 1.42 (SD 5 1.57) for
unpredictable correct trials, and 2.26 (SD 5 2.42) for error
trials.
EEG data were rereferenced to the numeric mean of the
mastoids and band-pass ﬁltered with cutoffs of 0.1 and 30 Hz.
The EEG was segmented for each trial, beginning 200 ms before

Downloaded from pss.sagepub.com at KAI NAN UNIV on March 7, 2015

Volume 19—Number 2

Greg Hajcak and Dan Foti

the response and continuing for 800 ms. The EEG was corrected
for blinks and eye movements using the method developed by
Gratton, Coles, and Donchin (1983). Speciﬁc intervals for individual channels were rejected in each trial using a semiautomated procedure, with physiological artifacts identiﬁed by the
following criteria: a voltage step of more than 50.0 mV between
sample points, a voltage difference of more than 300.0 mV within
a trial, and a maximum voltage difference of less than 0.50 mV
within a 100-ms interval. The average number of trials excluded
from ERP analyses was 2.03 (SD 5 5.22), or 0.87% of possible
trials.
Startle response magnitudes and latencies were quantiﬁed in
terms of the peak in the 20- to 120-ms window after the presentation of the startle probe. The ERN was deﬁned as the average
activity in a 0- to 100-ms window following response onset on
error trials. The ERN and startle responses were statistically
evaluated using SPSS (Version 14.0) General Linear Model software, with Greenhouse-Geisser correction applied to p values
associated with multiple-df, repeated measures comparisons.

The illustration in Figure 2 shows the scalp topography of the
difference in ERPs between error and correct trials in the 0- to
100-ms window following responses. At FCz, where the difference was numerically maximal, a one-sample t test conﬁrmed
that the ERN was signiﬁcantly less than zero, t(30) 5 3.83,
p < .001. Grand-average ERP waveforms for correct and error
trials at FCz are presented on the right in Figure 1. The ERN is
evident as the negative deﬂection that peaks approximately 50
ms after an incorrect response.
To determine whether the magnitude of the ERN predicted the
increase in startle following errors, we ﬁrst deﬁned startle potentiation for each participant as the startle magnitude after
errors minus the average of startle responses on predictable
correct and unpredictable correct trials. The amplitude of the
ERN predicted the degree to which errors potentiated the startle
response (see Fig. 2; r 5 .38, p < .05).1 Because the magnitude
of the ERN is negative and startle potentiation following errors is
positive, this negative correlation indicates that individuals with
larger error-related brain activity were characterized by larger
increases in startle responses after errors.

RESULTS

On average, participants made 23.39 (SD 5 9.68) errors. Figure
1 presents the average startle magnitude as a function of trial
type. As hypothesized, the magnitude of the startle response
differed as a function of trial type, F(2, 60) 5 5.64, p < .05. Post
hoc one-tailed t tests conﬁrmed that startle magnitudes were
larger following errors than following correct trials, whether the
startle was predictable, t(30) 5 2.51, p < .01, or unpredictable,
t(30) 5 2.61, p < .01; startle magnitude did not vary as a
function of predictability on correct trials, t(30) 5 0.99, p > .30.
Across participants, the magnitude of the error-potentiated
startle did not correlate with the number of errors (r 5 .06, p >
.75). Although the latency of the startle response was shorter
when the probe was predictable (error trials: M 5 96 ms, SD 5
24 ms; predictable correct trials: M 5 92 ms, SD 5 20 ms) than
when it was unpredictable (unpredictable correct trials: M 5
100 ms, SD 5 20 ms), this difference was not statistically signiﬁcant, F(2, 60) 5 1.46, p > .20.

Fig. 1. Mean startle magnitude as a function of trial type. Error bars
represent  2.04 standard errors, the 95% conﬁdence interval. Asterisks
indicate signiﬁcant differences between trial types, np < .01.

Volume 19—Number 2

DISCUSSION

To our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst study to use startle methodology to directly evaluate affective processing following errors.
Our ﬁndings are consistent with the notion that errors prompt defensive motivation: Startle magnitude was larger after the commission of errors than after correct responses. Our data indicate
that, like threatening stimuli and the anticipation of shock,
which have previously been shown to increase the startle response (Bradley et al., 2006; Grillon et al., 1993), errors also
potentiate reﬂexes that are inherently defensive. These data ﬁt
well within previous work demonstrating peripheral autonomic
response to errors (Hajcak et al., 2003b, 2004), but go further
to suggest that errors prompt both orienting and defensive responses.
In the present study, larger startle potentiation following errors was predicted by an increased ERN magnitude. Notably, the
magnitude of the error-potentiated startle was not related to the
size of the error positivity—the positive deﬂection in the ERP
that follows the ERN. This suggests that early error processing
indexed by the ERN may uniquely serve to prime defensive
1
The error positivity (Pe) was scored at Pz, where it was maximal, as the
average activity in a 200- to 400-ms postresponse window on error trials on
which a startle probe was not presented; unlike the ERN, however, the Pe did
not correlate with the magnitude of the error-potentiated startle (r 5 .04, p >
.80). Across participants, the magnitudes of the ERN and Pe were both uncorrelated with the number of errors (r 5 .21, p > .30, and r 5 .33, p > .05,
respectively). To determine whether the inclusion of startle probes in the
present study might have made errors unusually aversive and increased the
ERN, we ran 36 participants in a paradigm that was identical except that no
startle probes were presented. The mean ERN in those participants ( 3.32 mV,
SD 5 6.11 mV) did not differ from the mean ERN in the present study ( 3.54
mV, SD 5 6.52 mV), t(65) 5 0.21, p > .60. This ﬁnding suggests that the
presence of startle probes did not inﬂuence the magnitude of the ERN.

Downloaded from pss.sagepub.com at KAI NAN UNIV on March 7, 2015

105

Startle and the Error-Related Negativity

Fig. 2. Event-related potential (ERP) results. The illustration at the left shows the scalp topography of error-related brain activity
from 0 to 100 ms postresponse. The graph at the top right presents response-locked ERPs for error and correct trials at FCz, where
the error-related negativity (ERN) was maximal. Response onset occurred at 0 ms, and negative is plotted up. The scatter plot at the
bottom right depicts magnitude of the error-potentiated startle as a function of ERN magnitude.

motivational systems. Current computational models suggest
that the ERN signals the need to increase cognitive control
following errors (Holroyd & Coles, 2002; Yeung et al., 2004).
The present data, however, suggest that the ERN may also serve
a more basic motivational function: to activate defensive systems in the service of protecting the organism. This view is consistent with existing data relating the ERN to sensitivity to
negative, but not positive, stimuli and feedback (Boksem et al.,
2006; Frank, Woroch, & Curran, 2005).
Several studies have provided evidence supporting a relation
between the ERN and individual differences in emotionality:
Individuals who experience more anxiety and sensitivity to
punishment have larger ERNs (Boksem et al., 2006; Hajcak
et al., 2003a, 2004; Luu et al., 2000). Increased startle responses
and an increased ERN have both been related to heightened risk
for anxiety disorders (Grillon, 2002). Moreover, the current data
suggest that individuals with increased ERNs process errors as
more threatening and aversive. That is, anxious individuals who
are characterized by increased ERNs may exhibit a greater defensive response to errors compared with nonanxious individuals. Within Gray’s (1994) theory, these data are consistent with

106

the notion that the behavioral inhibition system (BIS) responds to
signals of nonreward and punishment, and that functioning of the
BIS relates to the experience of anxiety and fear. We are currently
pursuing a line of research relating the BIS, ERN, and errorpotentiated startle to further evaluate this possibility.
In the present study, startle probes were presented just 300 ms
after both correct and erroneous responses. Thus, the facilitated
startle following errors appears to reﬂect relatively rapid defensive mobilization. An important unanswered issue concerns
the mechanism whereby errors rapidly increase defensive
responding. In light of the association between the ERN and
error-potentiated startle, one possibility is that early ACC activity directly activates circuits in the brain (e.g., the amygdala)
that are critical to defensive mobilization and startle potentiation. Future studies might further examine the time course of
error-potentiated startle—to determine how early the potentiated startle begins, and for how long it persists, following errors.
Additional research might also examine the underlying mechanisms whereby errors increase the startle response.
Although errors may directly prime startle, it is also possible
that emotional valence mediates the relation between error

Downloaded from pss.sagepub.com at KAI NAN UNIV on March 7, 2015

Volume 19—Number 2

Greg Hajcak and Dan Foti

detection and increased startle, and other peripheral psychophysiological measures, such as facial EMG, could be used to
test this possibility. It is worth acknowledging that in the present
study, startle probes were presented on a much larger percentage
of error than correct trials. This was necessary in light of the fact
that errors are relatively rare in speeded response tasks. Although startle probes were therefore more predictable on error
than on correct trials, we manipulated predictability on correct
trials. Although the magnitude of the startle response on correct
trials was equivalent when the probe was predictable and when
it was unpredictable, it is possible that the presence of startle
probes made errors particularly aversive. This possibility could
be evaluated in future studies by asking participants how they
felt about making mistakes both in a condition with startle
probes and in a condition without startle probes.
Overall, the current study indicates that errors are motivationally salient events that prime defensive systems: The startle
response is potentiated following errors, compared with correct
responses. Insofar as the magnitude of the ERN predicted the
degree of startle potentiation following errors, these data further
highlight the role of the ERN in affective and motivational responses to errors. Following previous work on the ERN and
startle, future studies should evaluate how error-potentiated
startle varies as a function of individual difference variables.
Acknowledgments—We give special thanks to E. David Klonsky
for helpful comments on an earlier draft of the manuscript.
REFERENCES
Boksem, M.A., Tops, M., Wester, A.E., Meijman, T.F., & Lorist, M.M.
(2006). Error-related ERP components and individual differences in punishment and reward sensitivity. Brain Research, 1101,
92–101.
Bradley, M.M., Codispoti, M., & Lang, P.J. (2006). A multi-process
account of startle modulation during affective perception. Psychophysiology, 43, 486–497.
Bradley, M.M., Moulder, B., & Lang, P.J. (2005). When good things go
bad: The reﬂex physiology of defense. Psychological Science, 16,
468–473.
Brazdil, M. (2005). Intracerebral error-related negativity in a simple
go/nogo task. Journal of Psychophysiology, 19, 244–255.
Bush, G., Luu, P., & Posner, M.I. (2000). Cognitive and emotional
inﬂuences in anterior cingulate cortex. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 4, 215–222.
Chiu, P.H., & Deldin, P.J. (2007). Neural evidence for enhanced error
detection in major depressive disorder. American Journal of
Psychiatry, 164, 608–616.
Cook, E.W., III, & Turpin, G. (1997). Differentiating orienting, startle,
and defense responses: The role of affect and its implications for
psychopathology. In P.J. Lang, R.F. Simons, & M.T. Balaban
(Eds.), Attention and orienting: Sensory and motivational processes (pp. 137–164). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Curtin, J.J., Patrick, C.J., Lang, A.R., Cacioppo, J.T., & Birbaume, N.
(2001). Alcohol affects emotion through cognition. Psychological
Science, 12, 527–531.

Volume 19—Number 2

Dikman, Z.V., & Allen, J.J. (2000). Error monitoring during reward and
avoidance learning in high- and low-socialized individuals. Psychophysiology, 37, 43–54.
Falkenstein, M., Hohnsbein, J., Hoormann, J., & Blanke, L. (1991).
Effects of crossmodal divided attention on late ERP components:
II. Error processing in choice reaction tasks. Electroencephalography and Clinical Neurophysiology, 78, 447–455.
Falkenstein, M., Hoormann, J., Christ, S., & Hohnsbein, J. (2000).
ERP components on reaction errors and their functional signiﬁcance: A tutorial. Biological Psychology, 51, 87–107.
Frank, M.J., Woroch, B.S., & Curran, T. (2005). Error-related negativity predicts reinforcement learning and conﬂict biases. Neuron,
47, 495–501.
Gehring, W.J., Coles, M.G., Meyer, D.E., & Donchin, E. (1995).
A brain potential manifestation of error-related processing.
Electroencephalography and Clinical Neurophysiology, S44, 261–
272.
Gehring, W.J., Himle, J., & Nisenson, L.G. (2000). Action-monitoring
dysfunction in obsessive-compulsive disorder. Psychological
Science, 11, 1–6.
Gratton, G., Coles, M.G., & Donchin, E. (1983). A new method for offline removal of ocular artifact. Electroencephalography and Clinical Neurophysiology, 55, 468–484.
Gray, J.A. (1994). Three fundamental emotion systems. In P. Ekman &
R.J. Davidson (Eds.), The nature of emotion (pp. 243–247). New
York: Oxford University Press.
Grillon, C. (2002). Startle reactivity and anxiety disorders: Aversive
conditioning, context, and neurobiology. Biological Psychiatry,
52, 958–975.
Grillon, C., Ameli, R., Merikangas, K., Woods, S.W., & Davis, M.
(1993). Measuring the time course of anticipatory anxiety using
the fear-potentiated startle reﬂex. Psychophysiology, 30, 340–
346.
Hajcak, G., Franklin, M.E., Foa, E.B., & Simons, R.F. (in press). Increased error-related brain activity in pediatric OCD before and
after treatment. American Journal of Psychiatry.
Hajcak, G., McDonald, N., & Simons, R.F. (2003a). Anxiety and errorrelated brain activity. Biological Psychology, 64, 77–90.
Hajcak, G., McDonald, N., & Simons, R.F. (2003b). To err is autonomic: Error-related brain potentials, ANS activity, and posterror compensatory behavior. Psychophysiology, 40, 895–903.
Hajcak, G., McDonald, N., & Simons, R.F. (2004). Error-related psychophysiology and negative affect. Brain and Cognition, 56,
189–197.
Hajcak, G., Moser, J.S., Yeung, N., & Simons, R.F. (2005). On the
ERN and the signiﬁcance of errors. Psychophysiology, 42, 151–
160.
Hajcak, G., & Simons, R.F. (2002). Error-related brain activity in
obsessive-compulsive undergraduates. Psychiatry Research, 110,
63–72.
Holroyd, C.B., & Coles, M.G. (2002). The neural basis of human error
processing: Reinforcement learning, dopamine, and the errorrelated negativity. Psychological Review, 109, 679–709.
Holroyd, C.B., Dien, J., & Coles, M.G. (1998). Error-related scalp
potentials elicited by hand and foot movements: Evidence for an
output-independent error-processing system in humans. Neuroscience Letters, 242, 65–68.
Lang, P.J. (1993). The motivational organization of emotion: Affect
reﬂex connections. In S. van Goozen, N.E. van der Poll, &
J.A. Sergeant (Eds.), The emotions: Essays on emotion theory (pp.
61–96). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.

Downloaded from pss.sagepub.com at KAI NAN UNIV on March 7, 2015

107

Startle and the Error-Related Negativity

Lang, P.J., Davis, M., & Öhman, A. (2000). Fear and anxiety: Animal
models and human cognitive psychophysiology. Journal of Affective Disorders, 61, 137–159.
Luu, P., Collins, P., & Tucker, D.M. (2000). Mood, personality, and selfmonitoring: Negative affect and emotionality in relation to frontal
lobe mechanisms of error monitoring. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 129, 43–60.
Miltner, W.H., Lemke, U., Weiss, T., Holroyd, C., Scheffers, M.K., &
Coles, M.G. (2003). Implementation of error-processing in the
human anterior cingulate cortex: A source analysis of the mag-

108

netic equivalent of the error-related negativity. Biological Psychology, 64, 157–166.
Yeung, N., Cohen, J.D., & Botvinick, M.M. (2004). The neural basis of
error detection: Conﬂict monitoring and the error-related negativity. Psychological Review, 111, 931–959.

(RECEIVED 5/15/07; REVISION ACCEPTED 8/26/07)

Downloaded from pss.sagepub.com at KAI NAN UNIV on March 7, 2015

Volume 19—Number 2

