P SY CH OL OG I C AL S CIE N CE

Short Report

Loving Those Who Justify
Inequality
The Effects of System Threat on Attraction to Women Who
Embody Benevolent Sexist Ideals
Grace P. Lau, Aaron C. Kay, and Steven J. Spencer
University of Waterloo
People are often faced with threats to the legitimacy of their
sociopolitical system. According to system-justiﬁcation theory,
when faced with such threats, people are motivated to restore
their faith in the status quo by engaging in psychological
processes that bolster its apparent legitimacy (Jost, Banaji, &
Nosek, 2004). How might such processes of system justiﬁcation
manifest themselves in everyday interpersonal functioning?
One way that system justiﬁcation is revealed in social psychological functioning has been well-documented—through the
endorsement and cognitive activation of stereotypes whose speciﬁc content justiﬁes social inequality (e.g., Kay et al., 2007).
Stereotypes of men and women, in particular, can serve as
psychological tools that justify and maintain social inequality.
For example, Jackman (1994) has suggested that ascribing
favorable and ﬂattering, but clearly stereotypical, traits to
women reduces resistance to gender-based role divisions (also
see Hoffman & Hurst, 1990) by subtly implying that women are
well suited to the roles they have traditionally occupied, and that
stereotypically feminine traits are valued by society (also see
Jost & Kay, 2005).
Elaborating on this idea, Glick and Fiske (1996) developed
a measure of such stereotypes and demonstrated, across 19
countries, that the tendency to engage in this form of ‘‘benevolent sexism’’ (i.e., viewing women as ‘‘pure creatures who ought
to be protected, supported, and adored and whose love is necessary to make a man complete’’; Glick & Fiske, 2001, p. 109)
was (a) highest in countries with the greatest level of gender
inequality, but was also (b) positively correlated with explicitly
negative, hostile views of women (Glick et al., 2000). It has also
been demonstrated that exposure to benevolent sexist stereo-

Address correspondence to Aaron C. Kay, Department of Psychology, University of Waterloo, 200 University Ave. West, Waterloo,
Ontario N2L 3G1, Canada, e-mail: ackay@watarts.uwaterloo.ca.

20

types leads to strengthened beliefs in the fairness of the status
quo (Jost & Kay, 2005).
Does the psychological link between benevolent stereotyping
and system justiﬁcation inﬂuence how women are treated and
judged? We argue that it does, and speciﬁcally that when people
experience a threat to the legitimacy of the social system, one
factor that affects their attraction to a potential romantic partner
is whether that partner embodies system-justifying stereotypes,
such as those that align with benevolent sexist ideals.
We hypothesized that male participants whose faith in the
federal system was threatened would show greater romantic
interest in women who embody benevolent sexist ideals than in
women who do not embody these ideals. We also hypothesized
that they would show greater interest in women who embody
benevolent sexist ideals than would male participants whose
faith in the system was not threatened.
METHOD

Told they were participating in a memory task, 36 single male
Canadian undergraduates read an excerpt from a British
newspaper. The excerpt used in the system-threat condition
threatened their belief in the legitimacy of their federal system,
offering the opinion of a foreign journalist who believed the
social, economic, and political climate in Canada was worsening. In the no-system-threat condition, the excerpt described the
social, economic, and political climate in Canada as relatively
stable and positive (see Kay, Jost, & Young, 2005).
Participants then rated their romantic interest in each of eight
proﬁled women. Each proﬁle included a picture and self-description, ostensibly taken from a dating Web site. Half of the
proﬁles portrayed the women as embodying the three dimensions of benevolent sexism identiﬁed by Glick and Fiske (1996);
that is, these women were portrayed as vulnerable, pure, and
ideal for making men feel complete. The portrayals in the other

Copyright
r 2008 Association
Psychological
Science
Downloaded
from pss.sagepub.com
at TEXAS A &for
M INTL
UNIV on March
13, 2015

Volume 19—Number 1

Grace P. Lau, Aaron C. Kay, and Steven J. Spencer

Fig. 1. Mean ratings of romantic interest in benevolent-stereotypic and
non-benevolent-stereotypic women in the system-threat and no-systemthreat conditions. Error bars indicate standard errors.

four proﬁles were inconsistent with the benevolent sexist
stereotype in various ways; for example, the women were presented as career oriented, party seeking, active in social causes,
or athletic. The proﬁles were presented randomly, with the only
constraint being that two stereotypical or two nonstereotypical
proﬁles could not be presented sequentially.
After viewing each proﬁle, participants used 7-point scales to
answer eight questions gauging their romantic interest. They
reported the extent to which they found the woman attractive,
were interested in chatting with her on-line, would like to get to
know her better, would like to meet her personally, would likely
invite her to a party, would be pleased to have a date with her,
were interested in starting a relationship with her, and viewed
her as the ideal romantic partner. We then calculated an index of
romantic interest in the benevolent-stereotypic women (a 5 .97)
and non-benevolent-stereotypic women (a 5 .97).
To ensure that any differences in romantic interest across the
proﬁles were not due to differences in the pictures, we randomly
paired pictures with self-descriptions for each participant; furthermore, pretesting veriﬁed that all pictures were viewed as
equally attractive, F < 1.

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

A 2 (system threat vs. no threat)  2 (benevolent-stereotypic vs.
non-benevolent-stereotypic) analysis of variance conducted on
the mean ratings of romantic interest revealed a signiﬁcant twoway interaction, F(1, 34) 5 5.89, prep 5 .93, o2 5 .02. As shown
in Figure 1, participants showed greater interest in benevolentstereotypic women than in non-benevolent-stereotypic women
when their system was threatened, F(1, 34) 5 5.25, prep 5 .91,
d 0 5 .74, but not when their system was not threatened, F(1,
34) 5 1.38, prep 5 .68. Moreover, the system threat prompted
participants to increase their interest in benevolent-stereotypic
women, F(1, 34) 5 4.53, prep 5 .89, d 0 5 .71, but not in nonbenevolent-stereotypic women, F(1, 34) 5 0.05, prep 5 .26.

Volume 19—Number 1

In sum, men who experienced system threat had greater romantic interest in women who embodied benevolent sexist
ideals than did men who did not experience system threat, and
they also had greater romantic interest in women who embodied
these ideals than in women who did not embody these ideals.
These results have important theoretical and practical implications. They are the ﬁrst to connect processes of system justiﬁcation with those of interpersonal attraction, by suggesting that
the motive to see the sociopolitical system as just and fair can
lead men to prefer women who embody traits that reinforce
gender inequality. Such preferences can create a self-fulﬁlling
prophecy, encouraging women to accept subordinate roles
(Vescio, Gervais, Snyder, & Hoover, 2005). Thus, in times of
system threat, people who uphold the system may be particularly
valued.
REFERENCES
Glick, P., & Fiske, S.T. (1996). The Ambivalent Sexism Inventory:
Differentiating hostile and benevolent sexism. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 70, 491–512.
Glick, P., & Fiske, S.T. (2001). An ambivalent alliance: Hostile and
benevolent sexism as complementary justiﬁcations for gender
inequality. American Psychologist, 56, 109–118.
Glick, P., Fiske, S.T., Mladinic, A., Saiz, J.L., Abrams, D., Masser, B.,
et al. (2000). Beyond prejudice as simple antipathy: Hostile and
benevolent sexism across cultures. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 79, 763–775.
Hoffman, C., & Hurst, N. (1990). Gender stereotypes: Perception or
rationalization? Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 58,
197–208.
Jackman, M.R. (1994). The velvet glove: Paternalism and conﬂict in
gender, class, and race relations. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Jost, J.T., Banaji, M.R., & Nosek, B.A. (2004). A decade of system
justiﬁcation theory: Accumulated evidence of conscious and
unconscious bolstering of the status quo. Political Psychology,
25, 881–920.
Jost, J.T., & Kay, A.C. (2005). Exposure to benevolent sexism and
complementary gender stereotypes: Consequences for speciﬁc
and diffuse forms of system justiﬁcation. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 88, 498–509.
Kay, A.C., Jost, J.T., Mandisodza, A.N., Sherman, S.J., Petrocelli, J.V.,
& Johnson, A.L. (2007). Panglossian ideology in the service of
system justiﬁcation: How complementary stereotypes help us to
rationalize inequality. In M.P. Zanna (Ed.), Advances in experimental social psychology (Vol. 38, pp. 305–358). San Diego, CA:
Academic Press.
Kay, A.C., Jost, J.T., & Young, S. (2005). Victim derogation and victim
enhancement as alternate routes to system justiﬁcation. Psychological Science, 16, 240–246.
Vescio, T.K., Gervais, S.J., Snyder, M., & Hoover, A. (2005). Power and
the creation of patronizing environments: The stereotype-based
behaviors of the powerful and their effects on female performance
in masculine domains. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 88, 658–672.
(RECEIVED 2/14/07; REVISION ACCEPTED 4/26/07)

Downloaded from pss.sagepub.com at TEXAS A & M INTL UNIV on March 13, 2015

21

