P SY CH OL OG I C AL S CIE N CE

Research Report

The Threat of Appearing
Prejudiced and Race-Based
Attentional Biases
Jennifer A. Richeson and Sophie Trawalter
Department of Psychology and C2S: The Center on Social Disparities and Health at the Institute for Policy Research,
Northwestern University

ABSTRACT—The current work tested whether external
motivation to respond without prejudice toward Blacks is
associated with biased patterns of selective attention that
reﬂect a threat response to Black individuals. In a dotprobe attentional bias paradigm, White participants with
low and high external motivation to respond without
prejudice toward Blacks (i.e., low-EM and high-EM individuals, respectively) were presented with pairs of White
and Black male faces that bore either neutral or happy
facial expressions; on each trial, the faces were displayed
for either 30 ms or 450 ms. The ﬁndings were consistent
with those of previous research on threat and attention:
High-EM participants revealed an attentional bias toward
neutral Black faces presented for 30 ms, but an attentional
bias away from neutral Black faces presented for 450 ms.
These attentional biases were eliminated, however, when
the faces displayed happy expressions. These ﬁndings
suggest that high levels of external motivation to avoid
prejudice result in anxious arousal in response to Black
individuals, and that this response affects even basic attentional processes.

Many people feel anxious and uncomfortable during interracial
interactions. Recent work suggests, however, that some individuals are particularly prone to have stressful interracial encounters. For instance, White individuals who are highly
motivated to respond in nonprejudiced ways toward Black
people for external, rather than internal, reasons (e.g., because
of norms regarding political correctness) have been found to
avoid interracial interactions when possible, and experience
Address correspondence to Jennifer A. Richeson, Department of
Psychology, Northwestern University, Swift Hall, 2029 Sheridan
Rd., Evanston, IL 60208, e-mail: jriches@northwestern.edu.

98

heightened anxiety in anticipation of, as well as during, those
interracial interactions that they are unable to avoid (Plant,
2004; Plant & Devine, 1998). Research by Amodio has found,
furthermore, that such high-EM individuals automatically
evaluate Black targets more negatively than White targets, as
revealed by potentiated startle eye-blink amplitudes (Amodio,
Harmon-Jones, & Devine, 2003), unlike people who are internally motivated to respond in nonprejudiced ways toward
Blacks. Taken together, this work suggests that exposure to
Blacks automatically triggers negative affective reactions, including heightened anxiety, in high-EM individuals.
Although Amodio’s work has begun to explore some of the
component processes that underlie differences between high- and
low-EM individuals’ affective and stereotypical evaluations of
Blacks (see also Amodio, Devine, & Harmon-Jones, in press), what
has not been examined is the extent to which individuals’ affective
reactions shape basic cognitive processes beyond stereotyping. To
that end, the present study considered potential implications of
external motivation to respond without prejudice for visual attention. Speciﬁcally, we examined whether high-EM individuals’
anxious arousal in response to Blacks results in biased patterns of
selective attention similar to those found among individuals with
anxiety disorders (e.g., MacLeod, Mathews, & Tata, 1986).

ANXIETY AND ATTENTION

A plethora of research attests to the role that emotional stimuli
play in shaping attention (e.g., Bradley et al., 1997; Öhman,
Flykt, & Esteves, 2001). Transient motivational and mood states
(Tamir & Robinson, 2007), as well as more chronic concerns and
dispositions (Williams, Mathews, & MacLeod, 1996), shape the
events and objects to which people allocate attention. Of particular relevance to the present work is research suggesting that
individual differences in anxiety result in biased patterns of

Copyright r 2008 Association for Psychological Science

Volume 19—Number 2

Jennifer A. Richeson and Sophie Trawalter

attention regarding threatening stimuli (e.g., angry facial expressions; Bar-Haim, Lamy, Pergamin, Bakermans-Kranenburg,
& van Ijzendoorn, 2007; Fox, Russo, & Dutton, 2002).
Drawing on this research, the present work employed a
common test of attentional bias known as the dot-probe detection paradigm (MacLeod et al., 1986) to examine attentional
biases to Black, relative to White, faces (see also Eberhardt,
Goff, Purdie, & Davies, 2004). In this paradigm, the participant’s task is to detect the location of a probe, such as a small dot,
that is initially hidden from view behind one of two stimuli simultaneously presented on a computer screen, but subsequently
revealed when the two stimuli disappear. A short response latency to detect the probe suggests that participants’ attention
had been oriented, albeit sometimes unconsciously, to the
stimulus that previously obscured it. By contrast, a long response latency suggests that participants’ attention had been
oriented to the stimulus that had not obscured the probe.
Boyer et al. (2006) recently used a dot-probe task to study the
attentional biases of children with chronic pain. The critical
trials involved the presentation of pain-relevant, and thus
threatening, words (e.g., injure) paired with neutral words (e.g.,
washer). Furthermore, for half the trials, the words were presented subliminally (20 ms), whereas for the other half, they
were presented for 1,250 ms—ample time for attention to be
controlled. Results revealed that the children showed attentional engagement of pain-related words that were presented subliminally; they detected the dot faster when a pain-related word,
rather than a neutral word, had obscured it. By contrast, they
revealed attentional avoidance of pain-related words that were
presented supraliminally.
THE PRESENT STUDY

This study by Boyer et al. (2006) suggests that although
threatening cues seem to capture attention, individuals selectively avoid them when possible (see also Cooper & Langton,
2006; MacLeod & Rutherford, 1992). Modeled after this work,
the present study examined whether high-EM individuals reveal
biased patterns of attention regarding a relevant threat cue—
facial photographs of Black males. Given the ﬁndings of Boyer
et al., we expected that Black faces would capture high-EM
individuals’ attention at early processing stages, but would be
selectively avoided at later processing stages.
To bolster our investigation of the role of perceived threat in
the hypothesized attentional biases, we considered the extent to
which reducing the threat signal communicated by the faces
would attenuate the biases. Speciﬁcally, Black faces that communicate positive affect (i.e., smiling faces) should undermine
high-EM individuals’ anxious reactions and, thus, their attentional biases as well. Indeed, research suggests that several
brain regions, most notably the amygdala, quickly process
affective stimuli, including facial expressions of emotion, even
when presented subliminally (Whalen et al., 1998; see also

Volume 19—Number 2

Cunningham et al., 2004). Hence, smiling Black faces should
readily be appraised as less threatening than neutral Black
faces, and, therefore, high-EM individuals should be less likely
to reveal biased patterns of selective attention to the former.
Thus, we employed the dot-probe paradigm to examine the
attentional biases of high-EM White individuals in response to
facial photographs of Black and White males. The faces bore
either a neutral or a happy facial expression and were presented
for either a relatively brief (30 ms) or a long (450 ms) duration
before the dot was revealed behind one of them. We predicted
that high-EM individuals would reveal attentional engagement
of neutral Black faces presented brieﬂy, but attentional avoidance of neutral Black faces presented for the longer duration.
Low-EM individuals were not expected to reveal attentional
biases for neutral faces, and neither high-EM nor low-EM individuals were expected to display biased attention to happy
faces, irrespective of race or presentation duration.
METHOD

Participants
Thirty White college students (20 male, 10 female) participated
in the study in exchange for course credit. During a pretesting
session, students (N ﬃ 250) completed the Motivation to Respond Without Prejudice scale (Plant & Devine, 1998). The
External Motivation subscale of this instrument consists of ﬁve
items (e.g., ‘‘Because of today’s politically correct standards, I
try to appear non-prejudiced toward Black people.’’). Participants indicate their agreement on 9-point scales. Participants
for this study were selected from among those students with
External Motivation scores in the top (> 4.7) or bottom (< 3.8)
third of the full pretesting sample (Mdn 5 4.4). Although highEM and low-EM participants obviously differed in external
motivation (Ms 5 5.74 and 3.04), they did not differ in internal
motivation1 (Ms 5 5.32 and 4.97), t(27) 5 0.34, prep < .7.
Facial Stimuli
Forty-eight faces were obtained from Park’s Productive Aging
Face Database (Minear & Park, 2004); they were selected to
match in age (18–29), but differ in race (White, Black) and affect
(happy, neutral). Ten White undergraduates used 7-point Likert
scales to rate these faces for happiness, emotional neutrality,
and attractiveness. As expected, faces with neutral expressions
were rated as more emotionless than smiling faces (Ms 5 5.4 and
2.1, respectively), F(1, 44) > 400, prep > .999, but as less happy
than smiling faces (Ms 5 1.8 and 5.2, respectively), F(1, 44) >
1
Continuous External Motivation and Internal Motivation scores were largely
independent, r(27) 5 .19. Given participants’ moderate levels of internal motivation, this modest correlation implies that high-EM and low-EM participants
did not differ in implicit racial bias (Devine, Plant, Amodio, Harmon-Jones, &
Vance, 2002). Furthermore, most participants completed a measure of explicit
racial attitudes during pretesting; explicit attitudes and External Motivation
scores were also independent, r(22) 5 .17. Hence, racial bias is unlikely to
account for the between-group differences that emerged.

99

Race-Based Selective Attention

TABLE 1
Mean Dot-Detection Response Latencies for High-EM and Low-EM Participants
Neutral facial expressions
Group and stimulus
duration
Low-EM
Short duration (30 ms)
Long duration (450 ms)
High-EM
Short duration (30 ms)
Long duration (450 ms)

Happy facial expressions

Dot in location of
Black face

Dot in location of
White face

Dot in location of
Black face

Dot in location of
White face

387 (52)
394 (49)

382 (43)
401 (59)

375 (55)
406 (64)

381 (49)
407 (60)

424 (59)
466 (62)

437 (65)
453 (71)

420 (41)
449 (71)

414 (47)
448 (61)

Note. Latencies are in milliseconds. Standard deviations are given in parentheses. EM 5 external motivation to respond without
prejudice toward Blacks.

250, prep > .999. These effects were not moderated by the race of
the faces. Speciﬁcally, happiness ratings of smiling Black and
White faces did not differ, nor did emotionless ratings of neutral
Black and White faces (Fs < 0.5). Similarly, perceived attractiveness did not vary as a function of race, facial affect, or their
interaction (Fs < 0.5).
Dot-Probe Task
Each dot-probe trial began with a ﬁxation point that was displayed for 1 to 3 s. Next, two faces were displayed at 61 on either
side of ﬁxation. When the two faces disappeared from the screen,
a small gray dot appeared in the center of the screen location
where one of them had previously appeared. The dot remained
on the screen until the participant indicated its location by
pressing either the ‘‘left’’ or the ‘‘right’’ key on a computer
keyboard. For half of the trials, the face pairs appeared for 450
ms (long duration). For the other half, the face pairs appeared for
30 ms (short duration) and were replaced by a mask for 420 ms.
Participants were told that this task assesses visual attention
and were asked to respond as quickly and accurately as possible
once the dot appeared. They completed 2 practice trials in which
the word ‘‘FACE’’ appeared on either side of ﬁxation, followed by
128 experimental trials. The experimental trials consisted of 64
critical trials, in which one Black and one White face were
presented, embedded in an equivalent number of ﬁller trials, in
which either two White or two Black faces were presented.
During each trial, both faces displayed either a happy facial
expression or a neutral facial expression. Racial location of the
dot (whether the dot was located where the White or Black face
had previously appeared), facial expression of the stimuli
(happy or neutral), presentation duration of the stimuli (30 ms or
450 ms), and dot position (right or left of ﬁxation) were randomized across trials within four 32-trial blocks. All responses
and latencies were recorded by the computer.
Procedure
Participants were met and greeted in the laboratory by a White,
female experimenter. After providing informed consent, they

100

completed the dot-probe task on a Dell computer and were then
debriefed, thanked, and credited for participating.
RESULTS

Response latencies above 1,500 ms were deleted from the data
set, as were all incorrect responses, resulting in the removal of
1% of the data. Next, response latencies more than 3 standard
deviations above the mean (> 750 ms) were replaced with 750
ms, and latencies below 100 ms were replaced with 100 ms
(1.3% of the data). After inspection of the resulting data set, 1
high-EM and 1 low-EM participant were removed because of
their extremely slow dot-detection latencies (more than 50% of
their data had already been removed or transformed). Hence, the
ﬁnal sample consisted of 14 high-EM and 14 low-EM individuals. Preliminary analyses revealed no reliable main effects or
interactions due to sex of participant or dot position (right or left
of ﬁxation); hence, the data were collapsed across these factors.
Table 1 presents low-EM and high-EM participants’ mean
dot-detection latencies for each experimental condition. To
examine our predictions directly, however, we calculated attentional bias scores. Speciﬁcally, we subtracted participants’
mean log-transformed dot-detection latency for the Black-facelocation trials from their mean log-transformed dot-detection
latency for the White-face-location trials (separately for happy
and neutral expressions and for each presentation duration).
Greater bias scores indicate greater attention to Black faces,
relative to White faces (i.e., pro-Black attentional bias). These
bias scores were subjected to a 2 (group: high-EM, low-EM)  2
(presentation duration: short, long)  2 (facial expression: neutral, happy) mixed-model analysis of variance. Results were consistent with predictions. The three-way interaction of group,
presentation duration, and facial expression was reliable, F(1,
26) 5 4.17, prep 5 .92, d 5 0.80.2 Furthermore, there were no
differences between conditions for the low-EM participants (all
Fs < 0.4), but the Presentation Duration  Facial Expression
2

Analyses of dot-detection latencies revealed the expected four-way interaction, F(1, 26) 5 6.02, prep 5 .95.

Volume 19—Number 2

Jennifer A. Richeson and Sophie Trawalter

than happy White faces (or vice versa) by either low-EM or
high-EM participants, irrespective of presentation duration (all
Fs < 1.5).
DISCUSSION

Fig. 1. Pro-Black attentional bias toward faces with neutral (a) and
happy (b) expressions. Results are shown separately for participants with
high and low external motivation to respond without prejudice toward
Blacks (high EM and low EM, respectively) and for the two stimulus
durations. Error bars display standard errors of the means. Asterisks
indicate bias scores signiﬁcantly different from zero, p < .05 (one-tailed),
prep > .90.

interaction was reliable for the high-EM participants, F(1, 13) 5
8.16, prep 5 .97, d 5 1.58.
Examination of the neutral-expression trials revealed that
high-EM participants’ pro-Black attentional bias differed signiﬁcantly as a function of presentation duration, F(1, 13) 5
7.64, prep 5 .95, d 5 1.53. We predicted that neutral Black faces
would capture the attention of the high-EM participants when
the faces were presented for the short duration, but that these
faces would result in attentional avoidance when presented for
the longer duration. As predicted, high-EM participants tended
to orient to Black neutral faces that were presented for the short
duration ( prep 5 .89), but to White neutral faces that were
presented for the longer duration ( prep 5 .94; see Fig. 1a). Our
results are thus similar to those of Boyer et al. (2006); high-EM
participants revealed a pattern of attentional bias that is consistent with a tendency to orient toward a relevant threat initially
(i.e., attentional engagement), but to orient away from the threat
when possible (i.e., attentional avoidance). As predicted, this
pattern was not revealed for the happy faces. Figure 1b shows
that happy Black faces were not attended to signiﬁcantly more

Volume 19—Number 2

Our ﬁndings suggest that high-EM individuals’ threat reactions
to Black individuals bias early stages of attention. Speciﬁcally,
Black faces initially captured the attention of high-EM participants, but were avoided by these participants when possible
(i.e., when the presentation duration was longer). These patterns
of attentional bias were eliminated when the faces were smiling.
Presumably, the happy expressions reduced the Black male
targets’ threat signal, thereby attenuating the need for highEM individuals to attend to them initially or to avoid them
subsequently.
This study contributes to a growing body of work examining
basic processes underlying individual differences in the regulation and control of racial bias. As alluded to previously,
Amodio and his colleagues (Amodio et al., 2003, in press) have
found compelling differences between White individuals with
high external motivation to avoid appearing prejudiced toward
Blacks and White individuals with high internal motivation to
avoid appearing prejudiced toward Blacks. Speciﬁcally, externally motivated and internally motivated individuals have been
found to differ in both their automatic negative affective reactions to Blacks and their patterns of neural activity associated
with the inhibition of racial stereotypes. Building on this work,
the present study moved beyond the realm of mechanisms that
give rise to stereotyping and prejudice, considering instead the
implications of external motivation to respond without prejudice
for race-related differences in another basic cognitive process,
namely, selective attention. In so doing, this work revealed
the moderating role of positive facial affect in race-based selective attention, suggesting an important, yet heretofore largely
unexplored, avenue for future research on racial bias (but see
Chiu, Ambady, & Deldin, 2004; Hugenberg, 2005; Hugenberg
& Bodenhausen, 2003).
The present ﬁndings are also consistent with recent work by
Ito and Urland (2005). They found that compared with White
targets, Black targets evoked a larger positive-going eventrelated potential (ERP) component approximately 200 ms
poststimulus (P200) in White perceivers; this component is
thought to reﬂect early attention. About 250 ms poststimulus,
however, these White perceivers exhibited a larger negativegoing ERP component (N200) in response to White, compared
with Black, targets. Hence, White perceivers seemed to orient
toward Black faces initially, but to switch their attention toward
White faces subsequently.3 Considered in tandem with the
present work, these ﬁndings suggest that although Blacks may
3
Ito and Urland did not measure external-prejudice concerns, but it is likely
that engaging in a race-related task while neural activity was recorded heightened them.

101

Race-Based Selective Attention

capture the attention of Whites, especially among high-EM,
White individuals, they are likely to be either avoided or simply
disregarded later (Eberhardt et al., 2004; Rodin, 1987).
CONCLUSIONS

Establishing and enforcing standards and norms regarding the
expression of bias are of paramount importance to the creation of a
more harmonious, yet diverse, society. The present results suggest, however, that such standards may unwittingly encourage
anxious reactions and threat responses toward members of relevant out-groups—reactions that are revealed even in basic components of visual attention. Consequently, this work may enhance
efforts to foster cohesive culturally diverse communities.
Acknowledgments—We gratefully acknowledge the MacArthur Foundation and National Institute of Child Health and
Human Development Grant 1F32HD055772.
REFERENCES
Amodio, D.M., Devine, P.G., & Harmon-Jones, E. (in press). Individual
differences in the regulation of intergroup bias: The role of
conﬂict monitoring and neural signal for control. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology.
Amodio, D.M., Harmon-Jones, E., & Devine, P.G. (2003). Individual
differences in the activation and control of affective race bias as
assessed by startle eyeblink response and self-report. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 84, 738–753.
Bar-Haim, Y., Lamy, D., Pergamin, L., Bakermans-Kranenburg, M.J.,
& van Ijzendoorn, M.H. (2007). Threat-related attentional bias in
anxious and nonanxious individuals: A meta-analytic study. Psychological Bulletin, 133, 1–24.
Boyer, M.C., Compas, B.E., Stanger, C., Colletti, R.B., Konik, B.S.,
Morrow, S.B., & Thomsen, A.H. (2006). Attentional biases to pain
and social threat in children with recurrent abdominal pain.
Journal of Pediatric Psychology, 31, 209–220.
Bradley, B.P., Mogg, K., Millar, N., Bonham-Carter, C., Fergusson, E.,
Jenkins, J., & Parr, M. (1997). Attentional biases for emotional
faces. Cognition & Emotion, 11, 25–42.
Chiu, P., Ambady, N., & Deldin, P. (2004). Contingent negative
variation in response to emotional in- and out-group stimuli
differentiates high- and low-prejudiced individuals. Journal of
Cognitive Neuroscience, 16, 1830–1839.
Cooper, R.M., & Langton, S.R. (2006). Attentional bias to angry faces
using the dot-probe task? It depends when you look for it. Behavior Research and Therapy, 44, 1321–1329.
Cunningham, W.A., Johnson, M.K., Raye, C.L., Gatenby, J.C., Gore,
J.C., & Banaji, M.R. (2004). Separable neural components in the
processing of Black and White faces. Psychological Science, 15,
806–813.

102

Devine, P.G., Plant, A.E., Amodio, D.M., Harmon-Jones, E., & Vance,
S.L. (2002). The regulation of implicit race bias: The role of
motivations to respond without prejudice. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 82, 835–848.
Eberhardt, J.L., Goff, P.A., Purdie, V.J., & Davies, P. (2004). Seeing
black: Race, crime, and visual processing. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 87, 876–893.
Fox, E., Russo, R., & Dutton, K. (2002). Attentional bias for threat:
Evidence for delayed disengagement from emotional faces.
Cognition & Emotion, 16, 355–379.
Hugenberg, K. (2005). Social categorization and the perception of
facial affect: Target race moderates the response latency advantage for happy faces. Emotion, 5, 267–276.
Hugenberg, K., & Bodenhausen, G.V. (2003). Facing prejudice: Implicit prejudice and the perception of facial threat. Psychological
Science, 14, 640–643.
Ito, T.A., & Urland, G.R. (2005). The inﬂuence of processing objectives on the perceptions of faces: An ERP study of race and gender perception. Cognitive, Affective, & Behavioral Neuroscience,
5, 21–36.
MacLeod, C., Mathews, A., & Tata, P. (1986). Attentional bias in
emotional disorders. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 95, 15–20.
MacLeod, C., & Rutherford, E. (1992). Anxiety and the selective
processing of emotional information: Mediating roles of awareness, trait and state variables, and personal relevance of stimuli.
Behaviour Research and Therapy, 30, 479–491.
Minear, M., & Park, D.C. (2004). A lifespan database of adult facial
stimuli. Behavior Research Methods, Instruments, & Computers,
36, 630–633.
Öhman, A., Flykt, A., & Esteves, F. (2001). Emotion drives attention:
Detecting the snake in the grass. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 130, 466–478.
Plant, E.A. (2004). Responses to interracial interactions over time.
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 30, 1458–1471.
Plant, E.A., & Devine, P.G. (1998). Internal and external motivation to
respond without prejudice. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 75, 811–832.
Rodin, M.J. (1987). Who is memorable to whom: A study of cognitive
disregard. Social Cognition, 5, 144–165.
Tamir, M., & Robinson, M.D. (2007). The happy spotlight: Positive
mood and selective attention to rewarding information. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 33, 1124–1136.
Whalen, P.J., Rauch, S.L., Etcoff, N.L., McInerney, S.C., Lee, M.B., &
Jenike, M.A. (1998). Masked presentations of emotional facial
expressions modulate amygdala activity without explicit knowledge. Journal of Neuroscience, 18, 411–418.
Williams, J.M.G., Mathews, A., & MacLeod, C. (1996). The emotional
Stroop task and psychopathology. Psychological Bulletin, 120,
3–24.

(RECEIVED 5/4/07; REVISION ACCEPTED 8/20/07)

Volume 19—Number 2

