Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition
2008, Vol. 34, No. 3, 546 –555

Copyright 2008 by the American Psychological Association
0278-7393/08/$12.00 DOI: 10.1037/0278-7393.34.3.546

Bidirectional Associations in Multiplication Memory: Conditions of
Negative and Positive Transfer
Jamie I. D. Campbell and Nicole D. Robert

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

University of Saskatchewan
A variety of experimental evidence indicates that the memory representation for multiplication facts (e.g.,
6 ⫻ 9 ⫽ 54) incorporates bidirectional links with a forward association from factors to product and a
reverse association from product to factors. Surprisingly, the authors did not find evidence in Experiment
1 of facilitative transfer-of-practice from multiplication (6 ⫻ 9 ⫽ ?) to factoring (54 ⫽ ? ⫻ ?); in fact,
multiplication practice produced item-specific interference with factoring. Similarly, the authors found
no evidence in Experiment 2 that repetition of specific factoring problems (54 ⫽ ? ⫻ ?) facilitated
performance of corresponding multiplication problems (6 ⫻ 9 ⫽ ?). In Experiment 3, participants
practiced both multiplication and factoring and presented facilitative transfer in both directions. Thus,
bidirectional facilitation occurred if both operations were practiced, but interference occurred when only
one operation was practiced. We propose that this seemingly paradoxical behavior occurs because it is
adaptive for the bidirectional retrieval structure to retain operational flexibility in the context of
practicing both operations, whereas it is adaptive to specialize the memory representation for the
practiced operation (i.e., factoring or multiplication) when only one operation is practiced.
Keywords: arithmetic, factoring, multiplication, transfer, identical elements

identical elements theory, the so-called reverse association. To
foreshadow our main conclusion, despite the surprising discrepancy in behavior between the two paradigms, taken together, the
results do provide compelling evidence for the reverse association.

The cognitive mechanisms that underlie performance of simple
arithmetic (e.g., 2 ⫹ 4 ⫽ 6, 6 ⫻ 8 ⫽ 48) have received extensive
experimental analysis over the past quarter century. The main
theoretical goals have been to characterize the representations,
retrieval processes, and procedural strategies that subserve elementary math (see Ashcraft, 1992, 1995; Campbell & Xue, 2001;
LeFevre, Sadesky & Bisanz, 1996; Zbrodoff & Logan, 2005).
Understanding these basic skills is important because numeracy is
an increasingly pervasive requirement of modern life and because
cognitive number processing provides a constrained and tractable
domain for developing detailed theoretical models (Butterworth,
1999; Campbell, 2005; Dehaene, 1997). This article reports three
experiments that pursued predictions of a prominent theory of
arithmetic fact representation: the identical elements (IE) model
(Rickard, 2005; Rickard & Bourne, 1996; Rickard, Healy, &
Bourne, 1994; see also Campbell, Fuchs-Lacelle & Phenix, 2006).
The central theoretical issue that emerges is that two apparently
similar transfer-of-practice paradigms produce diametrically opposed effects—in one case positive transfer (retrieval facilitation)
and in other, negative transfer (retrieval interference). This raises
doubts about the evidential basis for a central component of the

The Identical Elements Model
The principles of the IE model originate in Edward L.
Thorndike’s seminal work of the early 20th century in which he
argued that transfer of learning was restricted to training and test
conditions with identical elements (see Singley & Anderson, 1989,
for an excellent overview of Thorndike’s transfer research). Applying IE principles to mental arithmetic, Rickard et al. (1994;
Rickard & Bourne, 1996) proposed that there is a single memory
node for arithmetic facts composed of identical elements (i.e.,
operands and answer) regardless of operand order. For example,
each multiplication node specifies the two operands, the operation,
and the product (e.g., [6, 8, ⫻ 3 48]) and is accessed by either
operand order (6 ⫻ 8 or 8 ⫻ 6). In contrast, problems that present
different operands and have different answers access different
nodes. Thus, inverse division problems (e.g., 48 ⫼ 8 and 48 ⫼ 6)
are represented by different nodes ([48, 8, ⫼ 3 6] and [48, 6, ⫼
3 8]).
Rickard and colleagues (Rickard & Bourne, 1996; Rickard et al.,
1994) conducted a series of transfer-of-practice experiments that
supported the basic IE model. These showed that repeated practice
of specific problems produced positive transfer (i.e., response time
[RT] savings) between identical pairs (e.g., 6 ⫻ 8 and 6 ⫻ 8) that
was practically equivalent to that between commuted pairs (e.g.,
8 ⫻ 6 and 6 ⫻ 8). This result supports the assumption that a
common representation mediates both orders of commuted multiplication pairs (cf. Verguts & Fias, 2005). In contrast, Rickard and
colleagues found no transfer of savings between the two orders of

Jamie I. D. Campbell and Nicole D. Robert, Department of Psychology,
University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, Saskatchewan, Canada.
Nicole D. Robert is now in the Department of Psychology, Carleton
University, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada.
This research was supported by a grant from the Natural Sciences and
Engineering Research Council of Canada.
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Jamie
I. D. Campbell, Department of Psychology, 9 Campus Drive, University of
Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, Saskatchewan, Canada S7N 5A5. E-mail:
Jamie.Campbell@USask.Ca
546

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

REVERSE ASSOCIATION

division problems (practice 56 ⫼ 7 ⫽ 8, test 56 ⫼ 8 ⫽ 7) and little
evidence of facilitative transfer in either direction between division
and multiplication (practice 7 ⫻ 8 ⫽ 56, test 56 ⫼ 8 ⫽ 7, or
practice 56 ⫼ 8 ⫽ 7, test 7 ⫻ 8 ⫽ 56). Campbell et al. (2006)
demonstrated that the IE model also applies to addition and subtraction: There is virtually complete transfer across commuted
addition pairs composed of identical elements (e.g., 6 ⫹ 8 ⫽ 14
and 8 ⫹ 6 ⫽ 14) but practically no transfer between inverse
subtraction pairs (e.g., 14 – 6 ⫽ 8 and 14 – 8 ⫽ 6).
Nonetheless, other transfer experiments testing simple multiplication and division indicated that the original IE model was not
sufficient. Campbell (1999) used a transfer paradigm that measured the effects of a single prime problem on a probe problem
tested a few trials later. There were transfer effects not predicted
by the IE model, including significant transfer of savings between
the two orders of division problems. Additionally, the larger, more
difficult division problems presented substantial RT savings in the
multiplication-to-division transfer condition (e.g., prime 7 ⫻ 9,
probe 63 ⫼ 7). Campbell proposed that transfer between orderreversed division problems and between multiplication and division could be reconciled with the IE model by distinguishing
associative transfer (i.e., savings from strengthening a common
problem node) from mediated transfer (i.e., savings from strengthening a related, mediator problem). Mediation involves solving a
problem (e.g., 63 ⫼ 7 ⫽ ?) by reference to a closely related
problem (e.g., 7 ⫻ 9 ⫽ 63 or 63 ⫼ 9 ⫽ 7). Because mediated
performance depends on the accessibility of the mediator, strengthening of the mediator produces RT savings (see also LeFevre &
Morris, 1999; Mauro, LeFevre & Morris, 2003).
To accommodate evidence of mediated transfer, Rickard (2005)
introduced a revised IE model (IE-r), which distinguishes between
asymptotic IE representations and nonasymptotic IE representations. When memory strength for a fact representation is near
asymptote, then performance will be mediated by direct retrieval,
and transfer effects will reflect IE principles. When memory
strength is below asymptote, then transfer effects might be mediated (e.g., division facilitated by strengthening the mediating multiplication fact). Indeed, Campbell et al. (2006) showed that interoperation transfer between division and multiplication was
observed only when trials reportedly solved by procedural strategies were included for analysis. When analysis included only trials
for which participants reported direct memory retrieval, there was
little evidence of inter-operation transfer. Thus, consistent with the
IE-r model, inter-operation transfer between division and multiplication apparently depends on mediational strategies that are used
when direct memory retrieval is not supported.
Rickard’s (2005) IE-r model also specified the mechanism by
which multiplication mediates division. Rickard proposed that, in
addition to providing a forward association from factors to products (e.g., 7 ⫻ 5 ⫽ 35), the IE representation of multiplication
facts also provides the reverse association from the product (e.g.,
35) to its factors (7 and 5). The reverse association can mediate
division when the required division fact is below asymptote. For
example, presentation of 56 ⫼ 7 would activate the reverse association from 56 to 7 and 8, with the unique element (8) reported as
the quotient. In two experiments, Rickard showed that university
students are, in fact, very efficient at factoring (i.e., stating the
factors given the product) and that practicing specific factoring

547

problems (30 ⫽ ? ⫻ ?) produced facilitative transfer to the corresponding multiplication fact (5 ⫻ 6 ⫽ ?).
Rusconi, Galfano, Rebonato, and Umiltà (2006) provided converging evidence for the reverse association in multiplication.
Rusconi et al. used the number matching task introduced by
LeFevre, Bisanz, and Mrkonjic (1988; Thibodeau, LeFevre &
Bisanz, 1996) in which participants are flashed a pair of cue digits
(e.g., 2 4) and then must decide if a subsequently presented target
number matches one of the cue digits. Response times are relatively slow if the target is the product (i.e., 8), as compared with an
unrelated number (e.g., 7). This suggests that multiplication problems can automatically activate the product, which interferes with
a no-match decision. Rusconi et al. showed that this interference
effect is also observed in the reverse direction (e.g., cue 8, target
2 4) and concluded that multiplication facts incorporate bidirectional links that provide both a forward and a reverse association.
Rickard (2005) pointed out that the reverse association would
develop for multiplication facts but would not be likely to develop
for addition facts. This asymmetry would occur because, for the
single-digit multiplication facts, most products are associated with
a unique pair of factors (e.g., 27 with 3 and 9) or two pairs of
factors (24 with 3 and 8, or 4 and 6), whereas sums generally do
not map onto unique addends. Consequently, practicing multiplication would establish both forward and reverse associations, but
practicing addition would not. Without a reverse addition association to mediate subtraction, it follows that addition-based mediational strategies should be relatively infrequent for subtraction.
Consistent with this, Campbell et al. (2006) observed interoperation transfer in both directions between corresponding simple
multiplication and division, but no inter-operation transfer of savings between addition and subtraction.

Experiment 1
The reverse association is supported directly by two different
experimental methodologies (Rickard, 2005; Rusconi et al., 2006)
and also neatly explains the complex pattern of facilitative transfer
effects observed in simple arithmetic (e.g., Campbell et al., 2006).
In the present study, we sought converging evidence for the
reverse association using a different transfer paradigm from that
employed by Rickard (2005). In Rickard’s transfer study (Experiment 1), participants received 40 practice blocks of alternating
factoring problems (8 ⫽ ? ⫻ ?) and multiplication problems (3 ⫻
4 ⫽ ?). During the subsequent multiplication test phase, participants received the items practiced by factoring (i.e., practiced 8 ⫽
? ⫻ ? then tested on 2 ⫻ 4); the practiced multiplication problems;
and new, unpracticed multiplication problems. Relative to new
problems, factoring facilitated corresponding multiplication problems substantially; improvement was 59% of that observed from
practicing multiplication. Thus, factoring appeared to strengthen
the corresponding multiplication fact, although not as much as
practicing multiplication. Rickard argued that the same memory
structure is strengthened by factoring or multiplying but that there
are also operation-specific processes that are strengthened, which
results in larger savings for the same operation than if there were
an operation change at test.
In Experiment 1, we attempted to extend the Rickard (2005)
transfer results using a pretest–practice–posttest design. Rickard
examined inter-operation transfer from factoring to multiplication

CAMPBELL AND ROBERT

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

548

only, but the IE-r model predicts that there also should be transfer
from practicing multiplication to factoring. Therefore, in Experiment 1, we examined effects of practicing multiplication (2 ⫻ 7 ⫽
?) on performance of the same problem (2 ⫻ 7 ⫽ ?) and performance on the corresponding factoring problem (14 ⫽ _ ⫻ _ ?).
One group of participants performed multiplication during the
pretest and posttest, and the other group performed factoring. Both
groups practiced only multiplication during the practice phase.
During the pretest and posttest, three experimentally defined problem sets were tested: practiced problems (composed from a subset
of four factors, either 2, 4, 7, 8 or 3, 5, 6, 9), unrelated problems
(composed from the factor set not used for the practiced problems),
and related problems (composed of one factor from the practice set
and one not used for the practice set). During the practice phase,
participants received 15 continuous blocks of the practice set
presented as multiplication problems. This pretest–practice–
posttest design allowed us to measure transfer from multiplication
practice to the same multiplication problem and to the corresponding factoring problem, with the unrelated problems providing a
control baseline. The related problems could be informative as
well. Phenix and Campbell (2004) demonstrated that multiplication fact retrieval is subject to retrieval-induced forgetting (RIF).
RIF is the phenomenon whereby repeated retrieval of a subset of
items results in increased retrieval difficulty for related items that
were not practiced (Anderson, Bjork, & Bjork, 2000; Anderson &
Green, 2001; Anderson, Green, & McCulloch, 2000). Similarly,
Phenix and Campbell found that repeatedly practicing some members of a times-table family (e.g., 7 ⫻ 2, 7 ⫻ 3, 7 ⫻ 4,. . .7 ⫻ 9)
resulted in slower response times for other members of the family.
Thus, comparing related and unrelated problems at posttest was
expected to provide a measure of RIF in this experiment.

Method
Participants
Twenty-eight volunteers (23 women, 5 men) were recruited
from the participant pool organized by the Department of Psychology at the University of Saskatchewan. Participants ranged in age
from 18 to 21 years (M ⫽ 18.8), reported normal or corrected-tonormal vision and, received bonus credit in their introductory
psychology course for participation.

Stimuli and Design
The experiment consisted of three phases, including a pretest,
practice, and posttest. There were two pretest and three posttest
blocks in which all 21 multiplication problems were presented in
a random order. During the pretest and posttest, participants in the
factoring group received the product (e.g., 56) and typed in the
corresponding factors (7 8) in either order. Multiplication participants received the factors (7 ⫻ 8) and typed the correct product
(56). Odd or even participant number determined assignment to the
factoring or multiplication group. During the practice phase, participants received 15 continuous blocks of seven practice-set problems, in random order, presented as multiplication problems.
Among the 21 problems tested in the pretest and posttest phases,
there were the seven practice-set problems, seven unrelated problems composed from operands not used for the practice set, and

seven related problems that included one operand used for the
practice set. To create these sets, seven problems were composed
from the factors 2, 4, 7, and 8 (8 ⫽ 4 ⫻ 2, 14 ⫽ 7 ⫻ 2, 28 ⫽ 7 ⫻
4, 32 ⫽ 8 ⫻ 4, 49 ⫽ 7 ⫻ 7, 56 ⫽ 7 ⫻ 8, 64 ⫽ 8 ⫻ 8) and seven
others from the factors 3, 5, 6, and 9 (15 ⫽ 5 ⫻ 3, 25 ⫽ 5 ⫻ 5,
27 ⫽ 9 ⫻ 3, 30 ⫽ 6 ⫻ 5, 45 ⫽ 9 ⫻ 5, 54 ⫽ 9 ⫻ 6, 81 ⫽ 9 ⫻ 9).
Assignment of these two sets to the practice and unrelated conditions was counterbalanced across participants. Practice and unrelated problems were unrelated in virtue of sharing no common
factor. Seven related problems were composed that contained one
factor that appeared in the practice set and one that did not appear
in the practice set. All participants received the same related
problem set, which included 6 ⫽ 3 ⫻ 2, 10 ⫽ 5 ⫻ 2, 20 ⫽ 5 ⫻
4, 21 ⫽ 7 ⫻ 3, 42 ⫽ 7 ⫻ 6, 48 ⫽ 8 ⫻ 6, 72 ⫽ 9 ⫻ 8. Although
absolute performance on the related set cannot be compared with
the practice and unrelated sets because of the possibility that the
related set differs in difficulty from the other two, changes in
performance for the related set between pretest and posttest can be
meaningfully interpreted (cf. Phenix & Campbell, 2004). Multiplication problems always appeared with the larger factor on the
left. All problems were presented horizontally in white characters
against a dark background. Characters were approximately 3 mm
wide by 5 mm high.

Procedure
The experiment required approximately 30 min and took place
in a quiet room with a researcher present. An IBM-type computer
was used, with two high-resolution monitors to display stimuli.
The researcher sat behind the participant, and each viewed a
separate monitor. The instructions for the task emphasized both
speed and accuracy. Factoring participants were instructed to use
the numbers 2 through 9 as factors and were informed that factor
order did not matter. Participants entered their responses using the
number pad on the computer keyboard. RT was measured from
stimulus onset to the final keystroke.
To begin each trial, a fixation dot appeared in the center of the
screen for 1 s, then flashed twice. The problem appeared on what
would have been the third flash. Multiplication problems occupied
a seven-character field (e.g., 7 ⫻ 2), with the multiplication sign at
fixation. For factoring problems, the stimulus (e.g., 14) appeared
with the leftmost character at fixation. The problem remained on
the screen until the participant had completed their response.
Presentation of problems within each block was continuous, but
participants received a short break after the pretest–posttest and
practice phases. Participants did not receive feedback about speed
or accuracy.

Results
The analyses of variance (ANOVAs) included data from the last
block of the pretest and the first block of the posttest, which
provide the cleanest measure of transfer effects owing to the
practice phase.

Response Times
Log transformation was applied to reduce effects of outlier RTs
and to normalize the data (cf. Campbell et al., 2006; Rickard,

REVERSE ASSOCIATION

Table 1
Anti-Log of Mean Median Log Response Time for Correct Trials
and Percentage of Errors in Experiment 1 by Operation,
Problem Type, and Test Phase
Factor
Problem type

Pretest

Multiply
Posttest

Pretest

549

was no evidence of a three-way interaction in the main analysis of
related and unrelated problems, F(1, 26) ⫽ 0.64, MSE ⫽ 5,369.9,
p ⫽ .43. Thus, the significant three-way interaction in the overall
ANOVA was attributable primarily to the opposing effects of
multiplication practice on the multiplication practice set (facilitation) and factoring practice set (interference).

Posttest

Percentage of Errors
Response time (ms)
1,571
1,760
1,571

1,736
1,531
1,612

1,728
1,835
1,610

1,355
1,652
1,545

15.3
8.2
15.3

2.0
14.3
9.2

Percentage of errors
Practiced
Unrelated
Related

9.2
9.2
5.1

17.3
11.2
3.1

Note. Means based on the last block of the pretest phase and first block
of the posttest phase.

2005). The median of log RTs for correct trials were analyzed with
a 2 ⫻ 3 ⫻ 2 ANOVA, with variables of group (multiplication or
factoring), problem type (practiced, unrelated, related), and test
phase (pretest or posttest). The antilogs of the mean median RTs
appear in Table 1. Applying the antilog transformation restores the
normalized means to units in milliseconds. Transfer effects (i.e.,
mean pretest RTminus mean posttest RT) with Masson and Loftus
(2003, p. 212) repeated measures 95% confidence intervals appear
in Figure 1. The only significant effect in the ANOVA was the
three-way interaction of group, problem type, and test phase, F(2,
52) ⫽ 6.60, MSE ⫽ 3,822.54, p ⫽ .003. Figure 1 shows that
practicing a subset of multiplication problems (i.e., the practiced
problem set) facilitated multiplication of those problems in the
posttest relative to the pretest (373 ms), but multiplication practice
interfered with the corresponding factoring problems (⫺165 ms).
Thus, instead of the expected facilitation effect, multiplication
practice produced robust interference for the corresponding factoring problems.
A comparison of the related and unrelated problems provided a
test for RIF; specifically, if related problems were inhibited during
practice, we would expect negative transfer for related relative to
unrelated problems. Figure 1 suggests that unrelated problems
presented some RT savings relative to related problems in the
posttest block. A separate 2 ⫻ 2 ⫻ 2 ANOVA that compared RT
for the unrelated and related problem sets as a function of group
and test phase (last block of pretest vs. first block of posttest)
provided weak evidence for a Test Phase ⫻ Problem Type interaction, F(1, 26) ⫽ 3.23, MSE ⫽ 5,369.9, p ⫽ .08. This trend
persisted into the second posttest block, however, and the Test
Phase ⫻ Problem Type interaction was statistically robust when
both posttest blocks were included, F(1, 26) ⫽ 6.22, MSE ⫽
4,980.8, p ⫽ .019 (RT savings of 245 ms and ⫺11 ms for the
unrelated and related sets, respectively). RT savings for the unrelated problems presumably would arise from participants globally
speeding up in the posttest relative to the pretest (with commensurate accuracy costs; see following error analysis). Relatively less
speed-up for the related problem set would occur if related problems were inhibited during the practice phase (i.e., RIF). There

The overall error rate was 9.9%. Mean percentage of errors (see
Table 1) received a 2 ⫻ 3 ⫻ 2 ANOVA, with variables of group
(multiplication or factoring), problem type (practiced, unrelated,
related), and test phase (pretest or posttest). As in the analysis of
RT, there was a triple interaction of group, problem type, and test
phase, F(2, 52) ⫽ 6.15, MSE ⫽ 96.5, p ⫽ .004. Again, practiced
multiplication problems presented facilitation, with error rates
dropping from 15.3% at the end of pretest to 2.0% at the beginning
of the posttest. As in the RT analysis, the corresponding factoring
problems encountered interference, with errors increasing from
9.2% in the pretest to 17.3% in the posttest.
In a separate error analysis that included only the related and
unrelated problems, only the Test Phase ⫻ Problem Type effect
was significant, F(1, 26) ⫽ 6.16, MSE ⫽ 75.69, p ⫽ .02. Errors on
unrelated problems increased in the posttest relative to the pretest,
whereas related problems tended to produce fewer errors in the
posttest (see Table 1). The increase in errors for unrelated problems presumably represents a speed–accuracy tradeoff associated
with global speed up in the posttest (see preceding RT analyses).
The opposing trend toward reduced errors on related problems in
the posttest could be a consequence of RIF. RIF is expected to
inhibit related problems (i.e., other problems in the same times
table; Phenix & Campbell, 2004), but this could facilitate accuracy
for problems in the related set by inhibition of their semantic
competitors. RIF would thereby slow related set RT (see preceding
RT analysis) but reduce related set errors. There was no evidence

600
500

Pre - Post RT (ms)

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Practiced
Unrelated
Related

Group
Factor
Multiply

400
300
200
100
0
-100
-200
-300
-400

Practiced Unrelated Related

Problem Set
Figure 1. Mean pretest minus mean posttest response time (RT) by group
(factor or multiply during the pretest and posttest) and problem set (practiced, unrelated, related) in Experiment 1. Both groups multiplied during
the practice phase. Error bars are 95% confidence intervals (Masson &
Loftus, 2003).

CAMPBELL AND ROBERT

550

of the three-way interaction, F(1, 26) ⫽ 1.54, MSE ⫽ 75.69, p ⫽
.23. Thus, as in the RT analysis, the significant three-way interaction in the overall ANOVA was attributable primarily to positive
transfer to the multiplication practice set but negative transfer to
corresponding factoring problems.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Discussion
Participants in the factoring group performed as quickly and
accurately as participants in the multiplication group, even during
the pretest. This is consistent with participants entering the experiment already in possession of accessible representations for factoring. Multiplication practice produced strong facilitation for the
practiced multiplication problems both in terms of RT and accuracy. Thus, the practice phase clearly was effective in strengthening the practiced multiplication facts. In contrast, multiplication
practice disrupted performance of the corresponding factoring
problems at posttest. This appears to be contrary to the hypothesis
that multiplication practice should strengthen a bidirectional retrieval structure that subserves both multiplication and factoring.
There was some evidence in the RT analysis that performance of
related problems also encountered interference relative to unrelated problems, but there was no evidence that this differed between the factoring and multiplication groups. This pattern raises
the possibility that multiplication practice inhibited RT for other
items in the same times table, which would be consistent with
previous evidence of RIF in simple multiplication (Phenix &
Campbell, 2004). As this trend was statistically equivalent for the
factoring and multiplication groups, it follows that RIF affected
both factoring and multiplication. This would be consistent with
the view that factoring and multiplication utilize the same retrieval
structure.
Nonetheless, Experiment 1 clearly failed to find that multiplication practice facilitated factoring for the corresponding problems; indeed, multiplication practice (7 ⫻ 8 ⫽ ?) interfered with
the corresponding factoring problem (56 ⫽ ? ⫻ ?). This negative
transfer is opposite the facilitation expected if practicing one
direction of the bidirectional retrieval structure facilitated its processing in both directions. Before considering how the current
findings might be reconciled with Rickard’s (2005) transfer evidence for the reverse association, it is important that we first try to
reproduce inter-operation transfer in the direction tested by Rickard (i.e., factoring to multiplication). In Experiment 1, we examined transfer from multiplication practice to factoring. Therefore,
Experiment 2 repeated the basic design and procedure of Experiment 1 except that participants practiced factoring during the
practice phase. On the basis of the IE-r model and results of
Rickard (2005, Experiment 1), we expected factoring practice
(e.g., 56 ⫽ ? ⫻ ?) to facilitate performance of the corresponding
multiplication problems (8 ⫻ 7 ⫽ ?).

Experiment 2
Method
Participants
Twenty-eight participants from the University of Saskatchewan
Department of Psychology participant pool received course credit
for participation (19 women, 9 men). Ages ranged from 18 to 25

years (M ⫽ 19.9), and all of the participants reported normal or
corrected-to-normal vision.

Stimuli, Design, and Procedure
Experiment 2 utilized the same stimuli, design, and procedure as
Experiment 1, with two exceptions in the practice phase. First, the
number of practice blocks was 16 rather than 15.1 Second, all
participants completed the practice phase with the factoring task
instead of the multiplication task.

Results
As in Experiment 1, the ANOVA included data from the last
block of the pretest and the first block of the posttest.

Response Time
The RT analyses were conducted as in Experiment 1. The
anti-logs of the mean median RTs appear in Table 2, and transfer
effects (i.e., mean pretest RT minus mean posttest RT) with
Masson and Loftus (2003, p. 212) repeated measures 95% confidence intervals appear in Figure 2. A 2 ⫻ 3 ⫻ 2 mixed ANOVA
with variables of group (factor or multiply at pretest and posttest),
problem type (practiced, unrelated, related), and test phase (pretest, posttest) indicated no significant main effects (all ps ⬎ .15).
All three two-way interactions were significant; however, these
were qualified by the triple interaction, F(2, 52) ⫽ 4.27, MSE ⫽
3,457.4, p ⫽ .019. As Figure 2 shows, practicing a specific set of
factoring problems (i.e., the practiced problem set) facilitated those
problems at posttest relative to pretest (291 ms) but did not
facilitate the corresponding multiplication problems (⫺71 ms). In
fact, Figure 2 suggests that, relative to unrelated problems, performance of related multiplication problems encountered interference
after practicing the corresponding factoring problems, whereas
factoring practice did not affect unrelated or related factoring
problems. A separate 2 ⫻ 2 ⫻ 2 ANOVA comparing the unrelated
and related problem sets as a function of group and test phase
provided some evidence for the triple interaction, F(1, 26) ⫽ 3.59,
MSE ⫽ 2,458.88, p ⫽ .069.

Percentage of Errors
The overall error rate was 7.9%. Mean percentage of errors (see
Table 2) received a 2 ⫻ 3 ⫻ 2 ANOVA with factors of group
(multiplication or factoring), problem type (practiced, unrelated,
related), and test phase (pretest or posttest). As Table 2 shows,
despite the counterbalanced assignment of problems to the practiced and unrelated conditions, for the factoring group, practiced
problems were substantially less error prone than unrelated problems during the pretest. The only significant effect in the error
analysis was a Group ⫻ Problem Type interaction, F(2, 52) ⫽
4.45, MSE ⫽ 118.2, p ⫽ .016. Error rates were more or less
uniform across problem type for the multiplication group (8.2%,
6.1%, and 6.1% for practiced, unrelated, and related, respectively)
1

We planned for 16 practice blocks in Experiment 1, but one block was
omitted because of a programming error.

REVERSE ASSOCIATION

Table 2
Anti-Log of Mean Median Log Response Time for Correct Trials
and Percentage of Errors in Experiment 1 by Operation,
Problem Type, and Test Phase
Factor
Problem type

Pretest

Practiced
Unrelated
Related

1,454
1,461
1,537

Posttest

Pretest

Posttest

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

1,163
1,532
1,499

1,432
1,385
1,287

1,521
1,431
1,455

5.1
6.1
6.1

11.2
6.1
6.1

Percentage of errors
4.1
13.3
11.2

wan campus. Participants ranged in age from 18 to 37 years (M ⫽
20.6), reported normal or corrected-to-normal vision, and received
course credit for their participation. One group constituted the
factor-at-test group and the other, the multiply-at-test group. The
practice phase was identical for the two groups.

Multiply

Response time (ms)

Practiced
Unrelated
Related

551

4.1
15.3
6.1

Note. Means based on the last block of the pretest phase and the first
block of the posttest phase.

but not for the factoring group (4.1%, 14.3%, and 8.7% for
practiced, unrelated, and related, respectively).

Discussion
Experiment 2 constituted a conceptual replication of Rickard
(2005, Experiment 1) in which practice of factoring produced
substantial facilitation to performance of the corresponding multiplication problems. Here, the factoring problems that were practiced sped up by about 300 ms between the pretest and posttest,
which demonstrates that the practice phase was effective in facilitating the practiced problems. The corresponding multiplication
problems, however, presented no evidence of facilitation. In fact,
related multiplication problems appeared to encounter RT interference from factoring practice. Thus, Experiment 2 provided no
evidence that factoring strengthened a retrieval structure that facilitates both factoring and multiplication.
Taken together, the results of Experiments 1 and 2 seem to
present a paradox when considered in relation to Rickard’s (2005)
Experiment 1. How can we reconcile the opposing negative and
positive transfer patterns presented by the two paradigms? Given
the failure of both Experiments 1 and 2 to produce the transfer
pattern expected on the basis of the hypothesis of the reverse
association, we designed Experiment 3 as a close replication of
Rickard (2005, Experiment 1), which demonstrated facilitative
transfer from factoring to multiplication. Unlike Experiments 1
and 2 in the present experiment, in Rickard’s paradigm, participants practiced both factoring and multiplication problems in the
practice phase. At test, transfer to corresponding multiplication
problems was measured relative to new, unpracticed problems. We
extended the design to include a second group of participants to
examine facilitative transfer from multiplication to factoring.

Experiment 3
Method
Participants
Two groups of 18 volunteers (26 women, 10 men) were recruited through the participant pool at the University of Saskatche-

Stimuli
Three sets of eight problems were created as follows: Set 1: 2 ⫻
5, 2 ⫻ 8, 3 ⫻ 4, 3 ⫻ 9, 4 ⫻ 8, 5 ⫻ 7, 6 ⫻ 7, 7 ⫻ 9; Set 2: 2 ⫻
4, 2 ⫻ 7, 3 ⫻ 7, 3 ⫻ 8, 4 ⫻ 9, 5 ⫻ 6, 5 ⫻ 9, 8 ⫻ 9; and Set 3:
2 ⫻ 3, 2 ⫻ 9, 3 ⫻ 5, 4 ⫻ 5, 4 ⫻ 7, 6 ⫻ 8, 6 ⫻ 9, 7 ⫻ 8. The sets
were approximately matched for difficulty with at least one problem, and at most three, involving each of the operands 2 through
9. One set served as the multiplication practice set, another served
as the factoring practice set, and the third was the unpracticed
“new” set of problems that provided a baseline during the test
phase. Assignment of the three sets to the three problem conditions
was counterbalanced. Operand order for the multiplication problems (e.g. 3 ⫻ 4, 4 ⫻ 3) was assigned randomly and then
alternated across blocks.

General Procedure and Design
The apparatus, stimulus presentation, and response input procedures were the same as in Experiments 1 and 2. Instructions
explained both the multiplication task and the factoring task while
emphasizing both speed and accuracy. For the factoring task,
participants were instructed to enter the operands in any order but
to avoid using repeated factors (e.g., 16 ⫽ 2 ⫻ 8 but not 4 ⫻ 4)
or the one rule (i.e., 1 ⫻ the presented number). Participants did
not receive feedback about speed or accuracy.2
For all participants, the experiment began with 40 practice
blocks, with operation (factor or multiply) alternating across
blocks. Even-numbered participants began practice with multiplication, and odd-numbered participants began with factoring. Eight
problems were presented per block, resulting in a total of 320
practice trials. There was a brief break between practice blocks,
and a screen message indicated the operation for the upcoming
block. After completing the practice phase, participants received
all three sets of problems (i.e., multiplication practice, factoring
practice, and new) in a test phase. During the test phase, half of the
participants performed factoring, and the other half performed
multiplication. Each of the 24 problems was presented in random
order in each of four test blocks.

Results
Practice Phase
To compare initial factoring and multiplication performance,
and to measure performance gains during practice, we analyzed
RTs and errors as a function of group (factor at test, multiply at
test), operation (factor, multiply), and block (early vs. late in
2
Not providing feedback was an unintentional procedural difference
between our Experiment 3 and Rickard (2005, Experiment 1), in which the
words “correct” or “incorrect” were displayed after each trial.

CAMPBELL AND ROBERT

practice). The first two blocks of practice represented early practice, and the final two of the 40 blocks represented late practice.
Response times. The median of log RTs for correct trials
received a 2 ⫻ 2 ⫻ 2 mixed ANOVA, with variables of group,
operation, and block (early, late). The anti-logs of the mean median RTs appear in Table 3. There were no effects involving the
group variable (all ps ⬎ .15), as would be expected given that the
practice phase was identical for the two groups. The main effects
of block and operation were qualified by the Block ⫻ Operation
interaction, F(1, 34) ⫽ 25.33, MSE ⫽ 4,193.62, p ⬍ .001. Early in
practice, factoring was 659 ms slower than multiplication on
average (2,521 ms vs. 1,862 ms), whereas late in practice this
difference was reduced to 66 ms (1,310 ms vs. 1,244 ms). Thus,
during the course of practice, factoring sped up 1,211 ms, and
multiplication sped up 618 ms on average.3
Percentage of errors. The overall error rate was 8.4% during
the practice phase. Table 3 includes the mean percentage of errors
as a function of group, operation, and block. The corresponding
ANOVA indicated no significant effects of group, although the test
of the three-way interaction suggested that the multiply-at-test
group presented somewhat larger savings for factoring and somewhat smaller accuracy savings for multiplication than the factorat-test group, F(1, 34) ⫽ 3.40, MSE ⫽ 53.93, p ⫽ .07. As in the
RT analyses, the main effects of block and operation were qualified by the Block ⫻ Operation interaction, F(1, 34) ⫽ 12.57,
MSE ⫽ 53.93, p ⫽ .001. Early in practice, factoring was substantially more error prone than multiplication (17.7% vs. 8.7%),
whereas error rates for factoring and multiplication were low and
equivalent late in practice (3.9% vs. 3.5%).

Test Phase
Response times. The median of log RTs for correct trials in the
first block of the test phase received a 2 ⫻ 3 mixed ANOVA, with
variables of group (factor during test phase vs. multiply during test
phase) and problem type (factored during practice, multiplied
during practice, or new). The anti-logs of the mean median RTs

Table 3
Anti-Log of Mean Median Log Response Time for Correct Trials
and Percentage of Errors in Experiment 3 by Group, Operation,
and Practice Blocks
Factor-at-test group
Practice type

Factor

Early
Late

2,576
1,281

Multiply

Multiply-at-test group
Factor

Multiply

2,466
1,338

1,876
1,318

20.1
3.5

9.0
5.6

Response time (ms)
1,847
1,170

Percentage of errors
Early
Late

15.3
4.2

8.3
1.4

Note. Early ⫽ Practice Blocks 1 and 2; late ⫽ Practice Blocks 39 and 40.

appear in Table 4, and the mean RT savings relative to new
problems (with 95% repeated measures confidence intervals) appear in Figure 3. There was a robust Group ⫻ Problem Type
interaction, F(2, 68) ⫽ 41.59, MSE ⫽ 4,470.55, p ⬍ .001. As
Figure 3 shows, this effect arose because RT savings relative to
new problems were much larger given the same operation (874
ms) than an operation change (316 ms). Nonetheless, there was
clear evidence of savings with an operation change, both for
practice as multiplication, followed by test as factoring (302 ms)
and for practice as factoring, followed by test as multiplication
(330 ms).
Percentage of errors. The error rate in the first block of the
test phase was 7.3%. The percentage of errors by group and
problem type appear in Table 4. As in the RT analysis, there was
a Group ⫻ Problem Type interaction, F(2, 68) ⫽ 6.11, MSE ⫽
86.89, p ⫽ .004. This effect arose because there were accuracy
savings relative to new problems given the same operation during
practice and test (5.9%) but not with an operation change (⫺1.8%).

Discussion
600

Group
Factor
Multiply

500

Pre - Post RT (ms)

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

552

400
300
200
100
0
-100
-200

Experiment 3 provided evidence of facilitative transfer both
from factoring to multiplication and from multiplication to factoring. Thus, we replicated Rickard’s (2005) findings of multiplication RT savings from factoring and showed further that the paradigm produces item-specific RT savings on factoring performance
from multiplication practice, as predicted by the IE-r theory.
Relative to new problems, same-operation savings for multiplication were 813 ms on average, whereas RT savings with an operation change were 330 ms on average. Taken as a percentage of
same-operation savings, inter-operation savings were 40% as large

-300
-400

Practiced Unrelated Related

Problem Set
Figure 2. Mean pretest minus mean posttest response time (RT) by group
(factor or multiply during the pretest and posttest) and problem set (practiced, unrelated, related) for all trials in Experiment 2. Both groups factored
during the practice phase. Error bars are 95% confidence intervals (Masson
& Loftus, 2003).

3
Unlike in Experiments 1 and 2, participants’ initial factoring performance in Experiment 3 was relatively poor compared with multiplication.
In Experiments 1 and 2, however, the practiced problem sets included four
so-called “tie” problems (5 ⫻ 5 ⫽ 25, 7 ⫻ 7 ⫽ 49, 8 ⫻ 8 ⫽ 64, 9 ⫻ 9 ⫽
81), which involve only one factor and therefore would be easy to factor.
Additionally, one practice set was composed largely of problems from the
five-times tables, which are also reliably easy problems. In contrast, in our
Experiment 3 and Rickard (2005, Experiment 1), there were no tie problems, and each problem set involved all factors from 2 through 9.

REVERSE ASSOCIATION

Group
Practiced operation

Factor at test

Multiply at test

Response time
Factor
Multiply
New

1,446
2,079
2,381

1,869
1,386
2,199

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Percentage of errors
Factor
Multiply
New
Note.

2.8
9.7
9.0

11.1
2.8
8.3

Means are based on the first block of the test phase.

(330 ms vs. 813 ms), which is somewhat smaller than the 59%
observed by Rickard (2005). This difference might have occurred
because, unlike Rickard’s Experiment 1, we did not provide accuracy
feedback; consequently, facilitative practice effects might have accrued more slowly in our experiment. For factoring, inter-operation
savings were 32% of same-operation savings (302 ms vs. 935 ms).

General Discussion
The purpose of these experiments was to seek converging evidence for the reverse association in simple multiplication fact
retrieval. In previous research, both a practice-transfer paradigm
(Rickard, 2005) and a matching-task paradigm (Rusconi et al.,
2006) provided evidence for a direct associative link from product
(8) to factors (2 4). Furthermore, given that the reverse association
would provide a mechanism for performing simple division, the
reverse association theory provided an explanation for positive
transfer from multiplication to corresponding division problems. In
contrast, we would not expect a corresponding reverse association
for simple addition facts because there are not comparable unique
mappings of sums to addends as there are products to factors.
Accordingly, we would not expect subtraction to be mediated by
addition, and there is no evidence of transfer of practice between
corresponding addition (4 ⫹ 3 ⫽ ?) and subtraction (7 ⫺ 3 ⫽ ?)
(Campbell et al., 2006). Our Experiment 3, which used Rickard’s
(2005) transfer paradigm, confirmed positive transfer from factoring to corresponding multiplication problems and extended Rickard’s results by showing that the paradigm also produced positive
transfer from multiplication practice to corresponding factoring
problems. Taken together, the collective evidence for a reverse
association mechanism in simple multiplication seems strong.
It might appear to be paradoxical, then, that our Experiments 1
and 2 failed to find positive transfer evidence of the reverse
association, in terms of either facilitation from factoring to multiplication or facilitation from multiplication to factoring. Nonetheless, in both Experiments 1 and 2, participants performed factoring
just as quickly and accurately as multiplication. Thus, participants
pre-experimentally possessed representations and processes that
permitted efficient factoring performance. Furthermore, in Experiment 1, the interference effect from multiplication practice on

factoring was not global but instead primarily affected the corresponding factoring problems. This item-specific negative transfer
between corresponding factoring (15 ⫽ ? ⫻ ?) and multiplication
(5 ⫻ 3 ⫽ ?) problems in Experiment 1 provides additional strong
evidence that the same retrieval structure mediated both. Thus,
although our paradigm for Experiments 1 and 2 produced an
inter-operation transfer pattern that was opposite that of Rickard
(2005), the results nonetheless reinforce the IE-r theory of a
bidirectional retrieval structure for multiplication facts.
The central question is why do the two transfer paradigms yield
opposing transfer patterns? One important procedural difference between the paradigms is that Rickard’s (2005) Experiment 1 participants practiced both factoring and multiplication during the practice
phase, whereas in our Experiments 1 and 2, participants practiced
only one operation. This difference could have several consequences
relevant to the opposing transfer patterns observed. In consideration of
this, it is useful to introduce a distinction between the long-term
memory (LTM) retrieval structure (i.e., the multiplication fact representation) and the cognitive procedures that retrieve relevant information from it (cf. Pirolli & Anderson, 1985; Zbrodoff & Logan,
1990). Zbrodoff and Logan coined the term microprocess to refer to
the LTM representation of a multiplication fact and the term macroprocess to refer to task-specific procedures that operate on the microprocess. In this view, factoring and multiplication stimuli activate
distinct production rules that extract different components from the
same LTM retrieval structure. For factoring, the product serves as a
retrieval cue for the factors, whereas for multiplication, the two
operands are retrieval cues for the product. The different input structures (e.g., 56 vs. 7 ⫻ 8) require distinct encoding processes to map
the stimulus to the common internal structure and different answerretrieval processes to extract the appropriate components for responding. Thus, each hypothetical macroprocess would be specialized to
handle the task-specific encoding, information extraction, and response requirements of each operation. The macroprocess implements
a production rule that applies generally to an entire arithmetic operation; thus, changes in the efficiency of executing the macroprocess
affect the entire operation. We assume that practicing a specific
problem facilitates processing both the macroprocess (i.e., increases
the fluency of extracting factors or products) and the microprocess

Group
Factor
Multiply

1200

RT Savings (ms)

Table 4
Anti-Log of Mean Median Log Response Time for Correct Trials
and Percentage of Errors During the Test Phase in Experiment 3

553

1000
800
600
400
200
0

Multiply

Factor

Practiced Operation
Figure 3. Mean response time (RT) savings relative to new problems by
group (factor or multiply at test) and practiced operation in Experiment 3.
Error bars are 95% confidence intervals (Masson & Loftus, 2003).

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

554

CAMPBELL AND ROBERT

(i.e., strengthens the bidirectional associative link between the product
and factors).
In Rickard’s (2005) Experiment 1 and our Experiment 3, we
expected practice to facilitate application of both the factoring and
the multiplication macroprocesses, because both operations were
extensively practiced. As participants cycled through 40 practice
blocks of a few factoring problems alternating with a few multiplication problems, their skilled ability to flexibly execute either
macroprocess would increase.4 The greatest post-practice benefits
at test would accrue for identical items (e.g., practice 8 ⫻ 9 ⫽ 72
and test 8 ⫻ 9 ⫽ 72 or 9 ⫻ 8 ⫽ 72), which benefit from the
strengthening of specific microprocess–macroprocess combinations. Corresponding problems in the other operation (e.g., 72 ⫽ ?
⫻ ?) would also show facilitation relative to new problems because the independent contributions of strengthening the relevant
microprocess (e.g., through multiplication practice) and the relevant macroprocess (e.g., through factoring practice on different
problems) combine to yield positive transfer.
In contrast, in our Experiments 1 and 2, participants practiced
only one operation (factoring or multiplication) during the practice
phase. The specific items practiced (i.e., microprocess–
macroprocess combinations) would be strengthened and present
savings at test, as observed. However, when there was an operation
change at test (i.e., practice 9 ⫻ 8 ⫽ ?, then test 72 ⫽ ? ⫻ ?;
practice 72 ⫽ ? ⫻ ?, then test 9 ⫻ 8 ⫽ ?), the relevant macroprocess had not been practiced and, consequently, there was no
potential benefit from applying a well-practiced macroprocess, as
in Rickard’s paradigm. In fact, practicing the application of one
macroprocess (i.e., factoring or multiplying) to the exclusion of the
other leads to item-specific interference during subsequent attempts to apply the unpracticed macroprocess. This negative transfer was most clear in Experiment 1, where multiplication practice
produced substantial RT and accuracy costs for corresponding
factoring problems. This suggests that exclusively practicing one
operation resulted in specialization of the fact representation to
accommodate the practiced macroprocess, perhaps by inhibition of
the other direction of association (cf. Singley & Anderson, 1989,
p. 116). When the unpracticed macroprocess was subsequently
applied to the modified fact representation, its efficiency to process
that structure was reduced. This interference was sufficiently
strong to overwhelm the potentially positive benefits of strengthening the bidirectional representation.
According to this account, item-specific interference between
factoring and multiplication occurs when only one operation is
practiced (Experiments 1 and 2) because the item’s retrieval structure becomes tailored to the practiced direction of retrieval to the
determent of the unpracticed direction of retrieval. When both
macroprocesses are practiced, however (even on different fact
representations, i.e., Rickard, 2005, Experiment 1 and our Experiment 3), then operation-specific tailoring of the fact representation
does not occur. Consequently, there is no negative transfer between operations and facilitative effects of strengthening the
shared memory representation can appear.
This complex behavior may be understood as an adaptive response to the different task environments created by the two
paradigms. In the context of mixed practice of the two operations,
it would be adaptive to retain the flexibility to apply either macroprocess. This view is consistent with evidence that increasing the
contextual variety of problems during practice can improve trans-

fer to unpracticed items (Schmidt & Bjork, 1992). If only one
operation is practiced, however, then in that context it becomes
adaptive to specialize the microprocess representations to maximize performance of the practiced operation. This results in itemspecific interference when the unpracticed macroprocess is applied
at test.

Conclusions
Three experiments tested the IE-r theory of number fact representation and provided new evidence that multiplication facts
entail a bidirectional retrieval structure that affords multiplication
or factoring. The important new theoretical contribution of this
work has been to show that processing of that retrieval structure is
subject to dynamic influences that can affect its processing in
seemingly contradictory ways. In two transfer paradigms that are
isomorphic with respect to theoretically basic design features (i.e.,
practice subset of problems in one or the other operation, test same
problems and corresponding problems in other operation), the
results were in surprising opposition, producing positive transfer in
one case and negative transfer in the other.
The apparent resolution of this seemingly paradoxical behavior
lies in recognizing that the learning system engaged during practice adapts to the variability in processing requirements that the
practice phase presents. In the context of mixed practice of factoring and multiplication, it is adaptive to retain the flexibility to
apply either macroprocess. In combination with the strengthening
of the bidirectional representation, this leads to item-specific facilitation across operations at test. When only one operation is
practiced, however, it is adaptive to specialize the memory representation for that operation, perhaps by inhibiting the reverse
direction of processing. This results in item-specific interference
when the unpracticed operation is attempted at test. The paradigmdependent behavior of the bidirectional retrieval structure thereby
arises from its adaptiveness to the learning and performance context. This observation, in addition to informing cognitive arithmetic theory and educational practice, is also relevant more
broadly because such adaptiveness likely is pervasive in human
learning and memory (Anderson, 1990; Schmidt & Bjork, 1992).

4
We would expect some global speed-up owing to improved fluency
with each macroprocess. Relative to early practice (Table 3), “new” problems at test (Table 4) were 195 ms faster for factoring (2,576 ms ⫺ 2,381
ms) and 267 ms faster for multiplication (2,466 ms ⫺ 2,199 ms).

References
Anderson, J. R. (1990). The Adaptive Character of Thought. Hillsdale, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Anderson, M. C., Bjork, E. L., & Bjork, R. A. (2000). Retrieval-induced
forgetting: Evidence for a recall-specific mechanism. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 7, 522–530.
Anderson, M. C., & Green, C. (2001). Suppressing unwanted memories by
executive control. Nature, 410, 131–134.
Anderson, M. C., Green, C., & McCulloch, K. C. (2000). Similarity and
inhibition in long-term memory: Evidence for a two-factor theory.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 26, 1141–1159.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

REVERSE ASSOCIATION
Ashcraft, M. H. (1992). Cognitive arithmetic: A review of theory and data.
Cognition, 44, 75–106.
Ashcraft, M. H. (1995). Cognitive psychology and simple arithmetic: A
review and summary of new directions. Mathematical Cognition, 1,
3–34.
Butterworth, B. (1999). What counts: How every brain is hardwired for
math. New York: Free Press.
Campbell, J. I. D. (1999). Division by multiplication. Memory & Cognition, 27, 245–275.
Campbell, J. I. D. (2005). Handbook of mathematical cognition. Psychology Press: New York.
Campbell, J. I. D., Fuchs-Lacelle, S., & Phenix, T. L. (2006). Identical
elements model of arithmetic memory: Extension to addition and subtraction. Memory & Cognition, 34, 633– 647.
Campbell, J. I. D., & Xue, Q. (2001). Cognitive arithmetic across cultures.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 130, 299 –315.
Dehaene, S. (1997). The number sense: How the mind creates mathematics. New York: Oxford University Press.
LeFevre, J., Bisanz, J., & Mrkonjic, L. (1988). Cognitive arithmetic:
Evidence for obligatory activation of arithmetic facts. Memory & Cognition, 16, 45–53.
LeFevre, J., & Morris, J. (1999). More on the relation between division and
multiplication in simple arithmetic: Evidence for mediation of division
solutions via multiplication. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 12, 151–175.
LeFevre, J., Sadesky, G. S., & Bisanz, J. (1996). Selection of procedures in
mental addition: Reassessing the problem size effect in adults. Memory
& Cognition, 27, 803– 812.
Masson, M. E. J., & Loftus, G. R. (2003). Using confidence intervals for
graphically based data interpretation. Canadian Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 57, 203–220.
Mauro, D. G., LeFevre, J., & Morris, J. (2003). Effects of format on
division and multiplication performance: Division via multiplicationbased representations. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 29, 163–170.
Phenix, T. L., & Campbell, J. I. D. (2004). Effects of multiplication
practice on product verification: Integrated structures model or retrieval
induced forgetting? Memory & Cognition, 32, 324 –335.

555

Pirolli, P., & Anderson, J. R. (1985). The role of practice in fact retrieval.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 11, 136 –153.
Rickard, T. C. (2005). A revised identical elements model of arithmetic
fact representation. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 31, 250 –257.
Rickard, T. C., & Bourne, L. E., Jr. (1996). Some tests of an identical
elements model of basic arithmetic skills. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 22, 1281–1295.
Rickard, T. C., Healy, A. F., & Bourne, L. E., Jr. (1994). On the representation of arithmetic facts: Operand order, symbol, and operation
transfer effects. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 20, 1139 –1153.
Rusconi, E., Galfano, G., Rebonato, E., & Umiltà, C. (2006). Bidirectional
links in the network of multiplication facts. Psychological Research, 70,
32– 42.
Schmidt, R. A., & Bjork, R. A. (1992). New conceptualizations of practice:
Common principles in three paradigms suggest new concepts for training. Psychological Science, 3, 207–216.
Singley, M. K., & Anderson, J. R. (1989). The transfer of cognitive skill.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Thibodeau, M. H., LeFevre, J. A., & Bisanz, J. (1996). The extension of the
interference effect to multiplication. Canadian Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 50, 393–396.
Verguts, T., & Fias, W. (2005). Interacting neighbors: A connectionist
model of retrieval in single-digit multiplication. Memory & Cognition,
33, 1–16.
Zbrodoff, N. J., & Logan, G. D. (1990). On the relation between production
and verification tasks in the psychology of simple arithmetic. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 16, 83–
97.
Zbrodoff, N. J., & Logan, G. D. (2005). What everyone finds: The problem
size effect. In J. I. D. Campbell (Ed.), Handbook of mathematical
cognition (pp. 331–346). New York: Psychology Press.

Received July 7, 2007
Revision received December 11, 2007
Accepted December 15, 2007 䡲

