P SY CH OL OG I C AL S CIE N CE

Short Report

Where Do We Look During
Potentially Offensive Behavior?
Jennifer Randall Crosby,1 Benoı̂t Monin,2 and Daniel Richardson3
1

Agnes Scott College, 2Stanford University, and 3University of Reading

Imagine (or remember) being the only member of a particular
social group in the room. Someone makes a questionable remark
about your group, and all eyes turn to you. If you have ever experienced this, you know that it is doubly unpleasant. Not only has
your social group been besmirched, but also you have suddenly
become the center of unwelcome attention. In the experiment
reported here, we used eye movement recordings to investigate
this phenomenon from the perspective of the people looking at the
offended bystander. Our findings point toward the function of this
behavior, and reveal the surprising depth of cognitive processing
that is engaged by social interaction.
One explanation for this attention is that people are practicing
social referencing—seeking out the responses of a potentially
victimized group member to help them assess the situation (Crosby,
2006). Because of their personal experience with prejudice (Essed,
1992), minority-group members may be seen as experts on prejudice (Swim, Cohen, & Hyers, 1998) and may also be seen as experts
in the area of morality (Vorauer, 2006). In fact, minority-group
members may have more influence than majority-group members
over judgments of discrimination (Crosby & Monin, 2008). Given
these findings, the responses of minority-group members may be
informative as people assess controversial comments.
A simpler, alternative hypothesis is that members of relevant
groups are looked at simply because of low-level associations;
hearing ‘‘the economy is in the red,’’ one might look at someone
wearing red. Eye movement studies often reveal such effects, in
which words or parts of words trigger looks to potential referents
(Tanenhaus, Spivey-Knowlton, Eberhard, & Sedivy, 1995), even
when the referents have been removed and the locations are
empty (Richardson & Spivey, 2000). This alternative association
hypothesis predicts that the mere mention of a social group will
lead people to look at a member of that group, regardless of
whether the group member might provide useful information.
We tested the association hypothesis by emulating potentially
offensive behavior in the lab. Four males (three White and one
Address correspondence to Jennifer Randall Crosby, Department of
Psychology, Agnes Scott College, 141 E. College St., Decatur, GA
30030, e-mail: jennifer.randallcrosby@gmail.com.

226

Black) discussed university admissions. One of the White discussants criticized affirmative action, and we manipulated whether
or not participants believed the Black discussant heard what
was said. Whereas the social-referencing hypothesis suggests
that he would be fixated only if he could have an informative
reaction, the association hypothesis predicts that he would be
fixated regardless.
METHOD

Twenty-five non-Black undergraduates participated for course
credit or a payment of $10. They sat unrestrained about 30 in.
from an ASL 504 remote eye-tracking camera (Applied Science
Laboratories, Bedford, MA) at the base of a 17-in. LCD display.
A Dell desktop computer calculated point of gaze and passed the
information every 33 ms to a PowerMac G4, which controlled
stimulus presentation and collected gaze-duration data. Following a calibration routine (2–5 min), participants read: ‘‘Please
watch the following discussion. At the conclusion of the discussion you will be asked questions about the discussion content
and/or the discussion participants.’’ The prerecorded video then
began (Fig. 1a), and participants’ eye movements were tracked
for its duration.
At the start of the video, an off-screen voice established that
either all discussants could hear each other (headphones on) or
the bottom two discussants (which included the Black individual) could not hear the others (headphones off ). To reinforce this
information, discussants raised their hands if they could hear
each other, and one affirmed, ‘‘So, it’s just two of us now?’’ or
‘‘So, it’s all four of us now?’’ The footage was otherwise identical
in the two conditions.
In the video, the discussants were instructed to give their
thoughts on the university’s admissions policies. The first White
discussant responded that the university should consider having
admission interviews. The second White discussant criticized
affirmative action in a way that was potentially offensive (Fig.
1a). Whereas the association hypothesis predicted that the
Black individual would be looked at more than the available
White discussants in both conditions, the social-referencing

Copyright r 2008 Association for Psychological Science

Volume 19—Number 3

Jennifer Randall Crosby, Benoı̂t Monin, and Daniel Richardson

a
‘‘I think one
problem with admissions is that too many qualified White
students are not getting the spots they've earned. These students work
hard all through school and then lose their spots to members of certain groups
who have lower test scores, and come from less challenging
environments. They get an unfair advantage.’’

b

21,055
19,348

Lower two discussants have
headphones turned...
Off

On

Total Looking Time (Ms)

4,000
3,500

p < .01

3,000
2,500
2,000
1,500
1,000
500
0

Discussant
Fig. 1. The video screen as it appeared to participants (a) and mean looking time to each discussant during the potentially offensive comments (b). Results are shown separately for the
headphones-on and headphones-off conditions. Error bars indicate standard errors. The p value
indicates a significant effect of the headphones manipulation (Tukey honestly significant difference).

Volume 19—Number 3

227

Looking During Offensive Behavior

hypothesis predicted this response only in the headphones-on
condition, when he could hear the remark and have a potentially
informative reaction.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

We performed a 2 (headphones on vs. off ) ! 4 (discussant)
analysis of variance on the total looking times to the discussants
during the potentially offensive comments and found a significant interaction F(3, 69) 5 5.15, p < .005, prep 5 .997, Zp 2 5 .18
(Fig. 1b). Specifically, participants looked at the Black individual
roughly 5 times longer (Tukey’s p < .01) in the headphones-on
condition (M 5 2,588 ms, SD 5 2,085) than in the headphonesoff condition (M 5 503 ms, SD 5 491). The headphones
manipulation did not produce significant differences in looks to
any of the White individuals. In addition, an analysis of looking
times during the comments of the first, nonoffensive discussant
showed that the interaction between the headphone manipulation
and discussant was not significant, F(3, 69) < 1.
A member of a relevant minority group attracted attention
during potentially offensive comments, but the association hypothesis cannot account for the pattern of results. Although the
footage showing the remarks was identical in the two conditions,
potentially triggering the same associations, participants showed
little interest in the Black bystander when they believed that he
could not hear what was being said.
From a cognitive perspective, these results reveal that participants simultaneously attend to what is said, who can hear
what is said, the social identity of the listeners, and the possible
reactions of the listeners, corroborating recent findings that eye
movements are influenced by a range of subtle linguistic and
interpersonal factors (Hanna, Tanenhaus, & Trueswell, 2003;
Metzing & Brennan, 2003; Richardson, Dale, & Kirkham, 2007).
From a social perspective, the finding that the reactions of
minority-group members are sought out by observers raises
important questions about the function of this behavior. With our
paradigm, we cannot rule out the possibility that minority-group
members are fixated simply because they are most likely to
react, and behavior in live social interactions (in which bystanders may themselves be observed by others) may differ from

228

behavior in this laboratory situation. Additional research is
needed to address these issues, but we believe this paradigm is
rich with possibilities and can help illuminate how people go
about answering the thorny question of what is appropriate and
what is offensive.

REFERENCES
Crosby, J.R. (2006). Targeted social referencing and the perception of
discrimination. Dissertation Abstracts International: B. The Sciences and Engineering, 67, 2874.
Crosby, J.R., & Monin, B. (2008). If you say so: How the opinions of
racial minorities influence discrimination judgments. Manuscript
submitted for publication.
Essed, P. (1992). Alternative knowledge sources in explanations of
racist events. In M.L. McLaughlin, M.J. Cody, & S.J. Read (Eds.),
Explaining oneself to others: Reason-giving in a social context
(pp. 199–224). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Hanna, J.E., Tanenhaus, M.K., & Trueswell, J.C. (2003). The effects of
common ground and perspective on domains of referential interpretation. Journal of Memory and Language, 49, 43–61.
Metzing, C., & Brennan, S.E. (2003). When conceptual pacts are
broken: Partner-specific effects on the comprehension of referring
expressions. Journal of Memory and Language, 49, 201–213.
Richardson, D.C., Dale, R., & Kirkham, N.Z. (2007). The art of
conversation is coordination: Common ground and the coupling
of eye movements during dialogue. Psychological Science, 18,
407–413.
Richardson, D.C., & Spivey, M.J. (2000). Representation, space and
Hollywood Squares: Looking at things that aren’t there anymore.
Cognition, 76, 269–295.
Swim, J.K., Cohen, L.L., & Hyers, L.L. (1998). Experiencing everyday
prejudice and discrimination. In J.K. Swim & C. Stangor (Eds.),
Prejudice: The target’s perspective (pp. 37–60). New York: Academic Press.
Tanenhaus, M.K., Spivey-Knowlton, M.J., Eberhard, K.M., & Sedivy,
J.C. (1995). Integration of visual and linguistic information in
spoken language comprehension. Science, 268, 1632–1634.
Vorauer, J.D. (2006). An information search model of evaluative
concerns in intergroup interaction. Psychological Review, 113,
862–886.
(RECEIVED 8/1/07; REVISION ACCEPTED 9/19/07)

Volume 19—Number 3

