P SY CH OL OG I C AL S CIE N CE

Research Article

Adaptive Memory
The Comparative Value of Survival Processing
James S. Nairne, Josefa N.S. Pandeirada, and Sarah R. Thompson
Purdue University

ABSTRACT—We

recently proposed that human memory
systems are ‘‘tuned’’ to remember information that is
processed for survival, perhaps as a result of ﬁtness advantages accrued in the ancestral past. This proposal was
supported by experiments in which participants showed
superior memory when words were rated for survival
relevance, at least relative to when words received other
forms of deep processing. The current experiments tested
the mettle of survival memory by pitting survival processing against conditions that are universally accepted
as producing excellent retention, including conditions in
which participants rated words for imagery, pleasantness,
and self-reference; participants also generated words,
studied words with the intention of learning them, or rated
words for relevance to a contextually rich (but non-survival-related) scenario. Survival processing yielded the
best retention, which suggests that it may be one of the best
encoding procedures yet discovered in the memory ﬁeld.
Memory serves a variety of adaptive functions, but psychologists
rarely address these functions directly. It is well known that
forming a visual image or engaging in deep semantic processing
signiﬁcantly improves retention relative to various control
conditions (e.g., Hyde & Jenkins, 1973; Paivio, 1971). However,
the ultimate reasons for these sensitivities remain largely unexplored. What advantages are gained by having a memory
system that shows sensitivity to imagery or semantic processing?
Psychologists offer a tool kit of proximate mechanisms to explain
observable mnemonic phenomena—multiple codes, greater elaboration, enhanced encoding-retrieval match—but generally leave
such functional questions unanswered (Klein, Cosmides, Tooby,
& Chance, 2002; Nairne, 2005; Paivio, 2007).
Eschewing a functional analysis becomes especially problematic if, in fact, human memory systems have been ‘‘designed’’

Address correspondence to James S. Nairne, Department of Psychological Sciences, Purdue University, 703 Third St., West Lafayette, IN 47907-2081, e-mail: nairne@psych.purdue.edu.

176

by nature to achieve speciﬁc ends. From an evolutionary perspective, a system’s structural properties are assumed to reﬂect
their functionality. Nature ‘‘selects’’ one physical design over
another because that design has ﬁtness value—it helps the organism solve an adaptive problem, and, in turn, the chances of
genetic transmission are increased. Structure (or form) follows
function, and, as a consequence, one cannot hope to understand
the characteristics of a memory system, or at least one will likely
ﬁnd this task difﬁcult, without ﬁrst understanding the speciﬁc
problems that the system has evolved to solve (Klein et al., 2002;
Tooby & Cosmides, 1992).
One could concoct functional explanations for the plethora of
mnemonic phenomena currently in vogue, but such post hoc
accounts—‘‘just-so stories’’—are the scourge of evolutionary
analysis (Gould & Lewontin, 1979). Our laboratory has recently
taken a more proactive approach. We have attempted to identify
adaptive problems that may have shaped the evolution of
memory and then to generate a priori empirical predictions. For
example, we (Nairne, Thompson, & Pandeirada, 2007) proposed
that human memory systems may be ‘‘tuned’’ to remember information that is processed for survival. From a ﬁtness perspective, it seems unlikely that memory evolved to be domaingeneral (i.e., insensitive to content) because certain information,
particularly information found in a survival context (e.g., foodstuffs, predators), is likely to be especially important to ﬁtness.
In four incidental-learning experiments, we (Nairne et al., 2007)
found that participants who were asked to rate the relevance of
unrelated words to a survival scenario subsequently remembered those words better than participants who processed those
same words in several deep-processing control conditions (instructions to rate pleasantness, relevance to moving to a foreign
land, or ease of generating an autobiographical memory).
The purpose of the present research was to test the true mettle
of survival-based processing by pitting the survival scenario
against a set of encoding procedures that are universally accepted as producing excellent retention. Memory theorists
generally dismiss the notion that one kind of encoding task is
inherently better than another, because the nature of the retrieval environment needs to be taken into account. However,

Copyright r 2008 Association for Psychological Science

Volume 19—Number 2

James S. Nairne, Josefa N.S. Pandeirada, and Sarah R. Thompson

forming a visual image, generating an item, and assessing
pleasantness are known to yield superior retention under standard testing conditions. In our ﬁrst experiment, which used a
between-subjects design, participants were asked to rate unrelated words for relevance to a survival scenario, pleasantness,
ease of generating a visual image, or ease of generating an autobiographical memory; in another condition, they had to generate words from scrambled letters before rating the words for
pleasantness. We also included an intentional-learning condition in which participants were asked to remember the words for
a later test. At issue was how retention after the survival rating
task would compare with retention after these time-honored
encoding procedures.





EXPERIMENT 1

Method
Participants and Apparatus
Three hundred Purdue undergraduates took part in this experiment in exchange for partial credit in an introductory psychology course. Fifty participants were assigned to each of six
conditions. All participants were tested individually in sessions
lasting about 30 min. Stimuli were presented and controlled by
personal computers.
Materials and Design
As in our previous study (Nairne et al., 2007), the word stimuli
were selected from the updated Battig and Montigue norms (Van
Overschelde, Rawson, & Dunlosky, 2004); we chose a typical
member from each of 30 unique categories. Five additional
words, selected according to the same criteria, were presented as
practice words. Across all six conditions, the same words were
presented in the same randomly determined order. A simple
between-subjects design was used.
In all conditions with the exception of the intentional-learning
condition, participants rated individual words using a 5-point
scale. Presentation of the words was followed by a short retention
interval (ﬁlled with a digit recall task), and then memory was
tested through free recall. For all groups with the exception of
the intentional-learning group, the memory test was unexpected.
All aspects of the design, including the form and timing of
stimulus presentation, remained the same across conditions.
Procedure
On arrival at the laboratory, participants were randomly assigned to one of the experimental conditions. The instructions
and the rating scales were as follows:
 Survival. ‘‘In this task, we would like you to imagine that you
are stranded in the grasslands of a foreign land, without any
basic survival materials. Over the next few months, you’ll
need to ﬁnd steady supplies of food and water and protect
yourself from predators. We are going to show you a list of

Volume 19—Number 2







words, and we would like you to rate how relevant each of
these words would be for you in this survival situation. Some
of the words may be relevant and others may not—it’s up to
you to decide.’’ The rating scale ranged from 1 (totally irrelevant) to 5 (extremely relevant).
Pleasantness. ‘‘In this task, we are going to show you a list of
words, and we would like you to rate the pleasantness of each
word. Some of the words may be pleasant and others may
not—it’s up to you to decide.’’ The rating scale ranged from 1
(totally unpleasant) to 5 (extremely pleasant).
Imagery. ‘‘In this experiment, we would like you to rate a list of
words as to the ease or difﬁculty with which they arouse
mental images. Nouns differ in their capacity to arouse mental
images of things or events. Some words arouse a sensory experience, such as a mental picture or sound, very quickly and
easily, whereas others may do so only with difﬁculty (i.e., after
a long delay) or not at all. Any word which, in your estimation,
arouses a mental image (i.e., a mental picture, or sound, or
other sensory experience) very quickly and easily should be
given a high imagery rating; a word that arouses a mental
image with difﬁculty or not at all should be given a low imagery rating.’’ Rating values ranged from 1 (low imagery) to 5
(high imagery).
Self-reference. ‘‘In this task, we would like you to think of
personal experiences you have had in your life. We will
present you with a series of words, and for each word we would
like you to rate how easily the word brings to mind an important personal experience.’’ The rating scale ranged from 1
(very difﬁcult) to 5 (extremely easy).
Generation. ‘‘In this task, we are going to show you a list of
words, and we would like you to rate the pleasantness of each
word. Some of the words may be pleasant and others may
not—it’s up to you to decide. You will notice that the ﬁrst two
letters of each word are switched; before you make each
rating, you will need to mentally switch the letters back to
their original positions in order to know which word you are
rating. For example, if you are presented with ‘‘iktten,’’ you
will need to switch the ﬁrst two letters in your head to get the
word ‘‘kitten’’ and then you can make your pleasantness rating
for that word.’’ Again, the rating scale ranged from 1 (totally
unpleasant) to 5 (extremely pleasant).
Intentional learning. ‘‘In this task, we are going to show you a
list of words, and we would like you to try to remember those
words for a future memory test.’’

Words were displayed one at a time in the center of the
computer screen. Each word appeared for 5 s along with the
corresponding rating scale (presented just below the word). On
each trial, the participant indicated his or her rating by clicking
on the number that corresponded to his or her choice. Participants were advised to make their decisions quickly, given the 5-s
presentation rate, and to try to use the entire rating scale (i.e., all
the values from 1 to 5). A short practice period, during which

177

The Comparative Value of Survival Processing

participants rated 5 practice words, preceded the presentation of
the 30 experimental stimuli.
Immediately following the rating task, participants were
asked to recall digit strings for 2 min. In each trial of this task,
seven single digits (ranging from 1 to 9) were presented one at a
time, at a rate of one digit per second, and then participants were
instructed to recall the digits in order by typing responses directly on the keyboard. The digit recall task was followed immediately by the recall test for the experimental words.
Participants were instructed to write down the words they had
rated earlier, in any order, on a response sheet provided by the
experimenter. The ﬁnal recall phase lasted 10 min.
Results and Discussion
The data of main interest, shown in Figure 1, are the free-recall
levels for the six encoding conditions. An overall analysis of
variance (ANOVA) revealed a signiﬁcant effect of condition,
F(5, 294) 5 4.41, MSE 5 0.019, Zp 2 5 .07. One condition,
survival processing, was notably discrepant. Post hoc analyses
conﬁrmed that the survival-processing group outperformed each
of the other encoding groups (individual prep values comparing
survival processing with each of the other conditions were greater
than .97); no signiﬁcant differences were found among any of the
non-survival-processing conditions. The same pattern of signiﬁcance was found in an item analysis, that is, when words were
used as the unit, F(5, 145) 5 4.37, MSE 5 0.012, Zp 2 5 .13.
Table 1 presents the mean ratings and response times for the
ﬁve incidental-learning conditions. These data are of interest
because they enable us to rule out some rather simpleminded
interpretations of the survival-processing beneﬁt. An ANOVA
on the rating data revealed a signiﬁcant effect of condition, F(4,
245) 5 16.50, MSE 5 0.213, Zp 2 5 .21; again, the sole discrepant condition was survival processing, which yielded a
lower average rating than the other conditions (individual prep
values comparing survival processing with each of the other
conditions were greater than .99). The fact that the stimulus
materials were considered least relevant to the rating dimension
in the survival scenario is important because retention usually

Fig. 1. Average proportion of words recalled in each condition of Experiment 1. Error bars represent 95% conﬁdence intervals.

178

TABLE 1
Mean Ratings and Response Times (With Standard Errors of the
Means) in Experiment 1
Rating
Condition
Survival
Pleasantness
Imagery
Self-reference
Generation

Response time (ms)

Average

SEM

Average

SEM

2.76
3.28
3.32
3.44
3.32

0.06
0.04
0.09
0.08
0.04

2,523.7
2,104.5
2,240.8
2,407.5
2,569.4

57.3
59.2
56.3
71.7
48.0

increases with cue-target congruence; that is, the extent to
which the rated word ﬁts the orienting question or scenario
determines the ease with which the orienting question can serve
as an effective retrieval cue at test (Craik & Tulving, 1975;
Schulman, 1974). The ﬁndings for the survival and pleasantness
conditions replicate our previous ﬁndings (Nairne et al., 2007)
that processing for pleasantness produces higher average ratings
than survival processing, but that survival processing produces
signiﬁcantly better retention.
An ANOVA on the response time data also revealed a
signiﬁcant effect of condition, F(4, 245) 5 10.91, MSE 5
174,054.20, Zp 2 5 .15; post hoc analyses showed that decision
times in the survival condition were signiﬁcantly slower than
those in the pleasantness and imagery conditions (prep values
were greater than .99), but did not differ from response times in
the self-reference (prep < .82) and generation (prep < .34) conditions. Given that survival processing produced better retention than each of the standard encoding conditions, and that
retention did not vary among the latter conditions, response time
cannot account for the observed memory differences. It is possible that survival decisions are more effortful than pleasantness
or imagery decisions, and this fact might have contributed to
some of the retention differences, but effort is generally thought
to be a poor predictor of retention overall (Craik & Tulving,
1975). Moreover, in our previous study (Nairne et al., 2007), we
found no signiﬁcant difference in average response times between survival and pleasantness conditions, but still obtained
the survival advantage in retention.
Clearly there was an unequivocal mnemonic beneﬁt for survival processing in this experiment, but it might seem surprising
that no differences emerged among the remaining encoding
conditions. It is important to bear in mind, however, that each of
the encoding procedures was designed to induce deep, or semantic, processing—in fact, these encoding tasks were chosen
speciﬁcally because they are known to induce excellent retention—so comparable performance levels were not completely
unexpected. More important, previous research comparing
deep processing conditions has typically produced few consistent differences. Packman and Battig (1978) directly compared
seven semantic rating dimensions, including imagery and
pleasantness, and found a signiﬁcant advantage for pleasantness

Volume 19—Number 2

James S. Nairne, Josefa N.S. Pandeirada, and Sarah R. Thompson

in free recall, but no signiﬁcant differences among the remaining
conditions. Challis, Velichkovsky, and Craik (1996) directly
compared a self-reference task with a living/nonliving judgment
and intentional learning and found a signiﬁcant advantage for
intentional learning in free recall. Somewhat surprising is our
failure to ﬁnd a generation effect, although we did not include a
traditional ‘‘read’’ control, in which the generated item is merely
presented intact, in our experiment. Both the generation and the
pleasantness conditions, which are most comparable, required a
pleasantness judgment, which, by itself, is known to produce
superior recall (Hyde & Jenkins, 1973; Packman & Battig,
1978). In addition, generation effects are often reduced or
nonexistent when generation is manipulated in a between-subjects design, and this may help explain why we did not observe
an advantage for generation (Nairne, Riegler, & Serra, 1991).
EXPERIMENT 2

One might question whether it was the thematic content of the
survival scenario, rather than its evolutionary signiﬁcance, that
produced the mnemonic advantage. The survival theme provided an overarching structure, or coherence, to the encoding
task that the other conditions lacked. Our previous study
(Nairne et al., 2007) provided evidence against this possibility.
In several experiments, survival processing yielded better retention than a control condition in which participants were
asked to rate the relevance of words to a thematic scenario involving moving to a foreign land. However, as a further test of
this narrative-theme hypothesis, we conducted another withinsubjects experiment directly comparing survival processing
with a contextually rich (but non-survival-relevant) encoding
scenario.
Method
Participants and Apparatus
Twenty-four participants either received partial credit in an
introductory psychology course or were given a small monetary
compensation. They were tested individually in sessions lasting
approximately 30 min. The apparatus was the same as described
for Experiment 1.
Materials and Design
A new set of 38 unrelated words (32 experimental words and 6
practice words) was created using the same method as in Experiment 1. The words were divided into four blocks of 8; order
of presentation within each block was randomly determined and
the same for all participants. A within-subjects design was used:
Participants rated 16 words using the survival scenario (S) and
16 words using a vacation scenario (V; see Procedure), with the
rating task alternating between blocks (i.e., SVSV for half of the
participants and VSVS for the other half, so that each word was
rated under both scenarios). Participants rated the individual
words using the same 5-point scale for both scenarios. After the

Volume 19—Number 2

words were presented and rated, there was a short retention
interval and then a surprise free-recall test.
Procedure
Experiment 2 replicated the procedural details, including timing, distractor task, and recall instructions, of Experiment 1. On
arrival at the laboratory, participants were randomly assigned to
one of the two counterbalancing versions of the experiment.
Initially, participants received general instructions informing
them that they would be required to rate words according to
particular scenarios. At the beginning of each block, either the
survival or the vacation instructions appeared; at the beginning
of the ﬁrst two blocks, participants rated three practice words to
ensure that they understood the two rating scenarios. After the
practice trials, participants were again presented with the scenario information, as a reminder. The fourth block of words was
followed by the distractor task and then the surprise free-recall
memory test. The survival scenario and its rating scale were as
described for Experiment 1. An identical rating scale was used
for the vacation scenario, which was presented as follows:
In this task, we would like you to imagine that you are enjoying an
extended vacation at a fancy resort with all your basic needs taken
care of. Over the next few months, you’ll want to ﬁnd different
activities to pass the time and maximize your enjoyment of the
vacation. Please rate how relevant each of these words would be for
you in this vacation situation. Some of the words may be relevant
and others may not—it’s up to you to decide.

Results and Discussion
The results are shown in Figure 2. Once again, survival processing produced a clear and signiﬁcant recall advantage—this
time against a contextually rich but non-survival-related control, F(1, 23) 5 5.70, MSE 5 0.028, Zp 2 5 .20. The survival
scenario produced signiﬁcantly higher average ratings than the
vacation scenario (2.92 vs. 2.61), but there were no signiﬁcant

Fig. 2. Average proportion of words recalled for each scenario in Experiment 2. Error bars represent 95% conﬁdence intervals (as per
Masson & Loftus, 2003).

179

The Comparative Value of Survival Processing

response time differences. A similar and strong recall advantage
for survival processing was found when words, rather than participants, were used as the basis of the analysis, F(1, 31) 5 9.40,
MSE 5 0.022, Zp 2 5 .23. Neither ratings nor response times
differed signiﬁcantly in the item analysis.

scenario used in Experiment 2. Josefa N.S. Pandeirada was
supported by fellowship SFRH/BPD/21534/2005 from the
Portuguese Foundation for Science and Technology.

GENERAL DISCUSSION

REFERENCES

The overall data pattern provides compelling evidence for the
power of survival processing. A condition requiring a simple
decision about the relevance of random words to a survival
scenario produced signiﬁcantly enhanced retention relative to
standard deep-processing controls and to a contextually rich,
but non-survival-relevant control. The survival advantage remained robust despite the fact that the deep-processing control
conditions represented the ‘‘best of the best’’ of known encoding
procedures. Although it is always possible to rig experimental
conditions to increase or decrease retention performance—for
example, by manipulating the encoding-retrieval match—all
procedural details remained the same across conditions except
for the critical encoding decisions. With these procedural constraints in mind, it is fair to conclude that survival processing is
one of the best—if not the best—encoding procedures yet identiﬁed in human memory research, at least when free recall is used
as the retention measure.
It is important to emphasize as well that the mnemonic superiority of survival processing follows nicely from a functionalevolutionary perspective. If one chooses to ask why human
memory systems evolved, then it is important to identify the
speciﬁc selection pressures that shaped their development.
From such a perspective, processing systems that aided survival, or ultimately ﬁtness, would likely have received a selection advantage. Consequently, it is not surprising that human
memory systems seem tuned, or biased, to retain information
that is processed for ﬁtness.
As noted earlier, memory researchers rarely attempt to place
mnemonic processing in such a functional context; at present, the memory ﬁeld can provide little insight into why human memory systems respond well when a visual image is formed
or meaning is accessed, although it can offer a variety of proximate mechanisms to explain obtained advantages (e.g., greater
elaboration or distinctiveness). Given that memory is likely to be
functionally designed, there is merit in seeking to identify the
speciﬁc adaptive problems that it is designed to solve (see also
Sherry & Schacter, 1987). The survival advantage demonstrated
in the present study is grounded theoretically in such a functional perspective, and it seems likely that other novel results
will follow if researchers keep a similar functional perspective
in mind.

Challis, B.H., Velichkovsky, B.M., & Craik, F.I.M. (1996). Levels-ofprocessing effects on a variety of memory tasks: New ﬁndings and
theoretical implications. Consciousness and Cognition, 5, 142–
164.
Craik, F.I.M., & Tulving, E. (1975). Depth of processing and the retention of words in episodic memory. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 104, 268–294.
Gould, S.J., & Lewontin, R.C. (1979). The spandrels of San Marco and
the Panglossian paradigm: A critique of the adaptationist programme. Proceedings of the Royal Society of London. Series B,
Biological Sciences, 205, 581–598.
Hyde, T.S., & Jenkins, J.J. (1973). Recall for words as a function of
semantic, graphic, and syntactic orienting tasks. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 12, 471–480.
Klein, S.B., Cosmides, L., Tooby, J., & Chance, S. (2002). Decisions
and the evolution of memory: Multiple systems, multiple functions. Psychological Review, 109, 306–329.
Masson, M.E.J., & Loftus, G.R. (2003). Using conﬁdence intervals for
graphically based data interpretation. Canadian Journal of Experimental Psychology, 57, 203–220.
Nairne, J.S. (2005). The functionalist agenda in memory research. In
A.F. Healy (Ed.), Experimental cognitive psychology and its applications (pp. 115–126). Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
Nairne, J.S., Riegler, G.L., & Serra, M. (1991). Dissociative effects of
generation on item and order retention. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 17, 702–709.
Nairne, J.S., Thompson, S.R., & Pandeirada, J.N.S. (2007). Adaptive
memory: Survival processing enhances retention. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 33,
263–273.
Packman, J.L., & Battig, W.F. (1978). Effects of different kinds of
semantic processing on memory for words. Memory & Cognition,
6, 502–508.
Paivio, A. (1971). Imagery and verbal processes. Oxford, England: Holt,
Rinehart & Winston.
Paivio, A. (2007). Mind and its evolution: A dual coding theoretical
approach. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Schulman, A.I. (1974). Memory for words recently classiﬁed. Memory
& Cognition, 2, 47–52.
Sherry, D.F., & Schacter, D.L. (1987). The evolution of multiple
memory systems. Psychological Review, 94, 439–454.
Tooby, J., & Cosmides, L. (1992). The psychological foundations of
culture. In J.H. Barkow, L. Cosmides, & J. Tooby (Eds.), The
adapted mind: Evolutionary psychology and the generation of
culture (pp. 19–136). New York: Oxford University Press.
Van Overschelde, J.P., Rawson, K.A., & Dunlosky, J. (2004). Category
norms: An updated and expanded version of the Battig and
Montague (1969) norms. Journal of Memory and Language, 50,
289–335.

Acknowledgments—Thanks are due to David Ceo for helpful
comments during the course of this research. We also thank
Daniel L. Schacter for suggesting a version of the vacation

180

(RECEIVED 3/13/07; REVISION ACCEPTED 7/26/07)

Volume 19—Number 2

