PS YC HOLOGICA L SC IENCE

Research Article

Auditory Change Detection
Simple Sounds Are Not Memorized Better Than
Complex Sounds
Laurent Demany, Wiebke Trost, Maja Serman, and Catherine Semal
Universite´ Bordeaux 2 and Centre National de la Recherche Scientiﬁque, Bordeaux, France

ABSTRACT—Previous

research has shown that the detectability of a local change in a visual image is essentially
independent of the complexity of the image when the interstimulus interval (ISI) is very short, but is limited by a
low-capacity memory system when the ISI exceeds 100 ms.
In the study reported here, listeners made same/different
judgments on pairs of successive ‘‘chords’’ (sums of pure
tones with random frequencies). The change to be detected
was always a frequency shift in one of the tones, and which
tone would change was unpredictable. Performance
worsened as the number of tones increased, but this effect
was not larger for 2-s ISIs than for 0-ms ISIs. Similar results were obtained when a chord was followed by a single
tone that had to be judged as higher or lower than the
closest component of the chord. Overall, our data suggest
that change detection is based on different mechanisms in
audition and vision.
Although audition and vision are very different perceptual
modalities, they resemble each other in certain respects. For
instance, similar Gestalt laws of perceptual organization operate
in vision (Wertheimer, 1923) and in audition (Bregman, 1990).
The temporal dynamics of perceptual organization also seem to
be similar in the two modalities (Pressnitzer & Hupé, 2006). In
the experiments reported here, we assessed whether people
detect changes in visual and auditory stimuli in similar ways.
The detection of a change following an interruption requires
some form of memory. In vision, two forms of memory may be
used for change detection: iconic memory and visual short-term
memory (VSTM). Iconic memory is retinotopic. Its capacity is
essentially unlimited, but the duration of storage in iconic
memory is brief. Thanks to iconic memory, as long as two

Address correspondence to Laurent Demany, Laboratoire ‘‘Mouvement, Adaptation, Cognition,’’ Université Bordeaux 2 and CNRS,
BP 63, 146 rue Leo-Saignat, F-33076, Bordeaux, France, e-mail:
laurent.demany@psyac.u-bordeaux2.fr.

Volume 19—Number 1

complex visual stimuli occur in the same position, a small local
change between them can be detected easily even when this
change is unpredictable; however, the interstimulus interval
(ISI) must not exceed about 100 ms (Pashler, 1988; Phillips,
1974; Stelmach, Bourassa, & Di Lollo, 1984). VSTM, in contrast, is not retinotopic and stores information much more durably than iconic memory does (Phillips, 1974); however, its
capacity is limited to at most four or ﬁve objects (Alvarez &
Cavanagh, 2004; Luck & Vogel, 1997). The low capacity of
VSTM is one cause of the change blindness of human observers
when they have to compare two complex images separated by
more than a few 10s of milliseconds (Rensink, O’Regan, &
Clark, 1997; Simons & Levin, 1997).
It is commonly believed that there is no major difference
between auditory memory and visual memory: Iconic memory
and VSTM are thought to have auditory counterparts with the
same properties (Cowan, 1984; Massaro & Loftus, 1996; Visscher, Kaplan, Kahana, & Sekuler, 2007). It has also been
claimed that change blindness has an auditory equivalent,
‘‘change deafness’’ (Eramudugolla, Irvine, McAnally, Martin, &
Mattingley, 2005; Vitevitch, 2003). In contrast with such views,
the experiments reported here suggest that the mechanisms of
change detection are dissimilar in vision and audition. As
mentioned earlier, the detection of a local change in a static
image beneﬁts from a high-capacity memory if the pre- and
postchange images are separated by a very short ISI, but is
limited by a low-capacity memory if the ISI exceeds 100 ms. As a
consequence, the complexity of the prechange image (the
number of its perceptual elements) has little effect on the detectability of a local change when the ISI is very short, but has a
dramatic effect when the ISI exceeds 100 ms (Phillips, 1974).
We show here that when the stimuli are sounds (random chords)
rather than images, one does not observe a similar interaction.
The effect of the spectral complexity of the prechange sound on
the detectability of a spectrally local change does not depend on
the ISI, for ISIs ranging from 0 ms to at least 2 s. It is more
difﬁcult to detect a change in one tone among many tones than to

Copyright r 2008 Association for Psychological Science

85

Auditory Change Detection

detect a change in one tone among few tones, and the difﬁculty of
change detection increases with the ISI. However, the absence
of an interaction between spectral complexity and ISI implies
that it is not more difﬁcult to remember many tones than to remember few tones. To that extent, auditory memory appears to
make change detection easier in audition than in vision.
EXPERIMENTS 1 AND 2

Experiments 1 and 2 transposed one of the visual experiments
reported by Phillips (1974) to the auditory domain. On each
trial, the listener was presented with two successive ‘‘chords’’
(sums of pure tones) and had to indicate if they were identical or
not. When the two chords were not identical, the difference
resulted from a frequency shift in a single, randomly selected
tone, as in the example given in Figure 1 (left). Performance,
measured using the detectability index d 0 , was examined as a
function of two variables: the number of tones in each chord (N)
and the ISI.
Method
Participants
Four audiometrically normal listeners, including authors L.D.
and W.T., participated in both experiments. Each listener was
initially trained in the task for at least 4 hr. This training period
was used to adjust the magnitude of the frequency shifts to listener-speciﬁc values, so as to prevent ﬂoor or ceiling effects.
Stimuli
The pure tones forming each chord had a duration of 600 ms and
a nominal sound pressure level (SPL) of 65 dB; they were gated

on and off with 20-ms raised-cosine amplitude ramps. In the ﬁrst
chord of each trial, adjacent tones were separated by frequency
intervals varying randomly (and uniformly, on a logarithmic
frequency scale) between 3 and 6 semitones (1 semitone 5 1/12
octave). The ﬁrst chord was randomly positioned in a 5-octave
frequency range (125–4000 Hz) and was followed by the second
chord after a silent ISI of 0, 250, 750, or 2,000 ms. From the ﬁrst
chord to the second chord, the probability of a frequency shift in
one tone was .5; when such a shift occurred, it was equiprobably
positive or negative. The tones forming the two chords had
random initial phases, but any tone appearing in both chords had
the same initial phase in these two chords.
In Experiment 1, the value of N was 4, 7, or 12. The probability of a shift was equal for all tones, and the magnitude of the
shifts, Ds, was ﬁxed for a given listener. As Figure 2a indicates,
Ds was equal to 0.50 semitone for 3 listeners and 0.70 semitone
for the 4th listener.
In Experiment 2, the value of N was either 4 or 12, and only
‘‘inner’’ tones could shift (so that only 2 tones could shift when N
was 4, whereas 10 tones could shift when N was 12). In this
experiment, moreover, we used larger Ds values for 12-tone
chords than for 4-tone chords, as indicated in Figure 2b, in order
to obtain similar overall levels of performance for these two
conditions.
The stimuli were digitally generated with a sampling rate of
44.1 kHz and a 24-bit amplitude quantization. They were
presented binaurally via headphones (Sennheiser HD265).
Procedure
Trials were arranged in blocks of 40, with N and the ISI ﬁxed
within each block. The listener, seated in a sound-attenuating

Fig. 1. Illustration of the task used in Experiments 1 and 2 (left) and in Experiments 4 and 5 (right). Dashes
represent pure tones. The correct responses on these two trials are ‘‘different’’ (left) and ‘‘downward’’ (right).

86

Volume 19—Number 1

L. Demany et al.

Fig. 2. Results of Experiments 1, 2, 4, and 5: mean values of d 0 as a function of the interstimulus
interval (ISI) and the number of tones in the chords (N). For each experiment, a table displays the
magnitude of the frequency shifts, Ds (in semitones), as a function of N for each tested listener (L1,
L2, . . . L7; in Experiment 4, Ds did not vary across listeners).

booth, gave his or her responses (‘‘same’’ or ‘‘different’’) by
clicking a computer mouse on two virtual buttons. When the ISI
was 0 or 250 ms, the delay separating a response from the ﬁrst
chord of the next trial was 600 ms; otherwise, this delay was
equal to the ISI. Every session included one block of trials in
each of the 12 (Experiment 1) or 8 (Experiment 2) possible
conditions, which were randomly ordered. Each experiment
consisted of 12 sessions.
Results
For each listener and experimental condition, we computed d 0
from the responses given on the 480 trials. The mean values of d 0
across listeners are displayed in Figures 2a and 2b.
In Experiment 1, d 0 decreased signiﬁcantly as the ISI increased, F(3, 9) 5 35.6, p < .001, prep > .998 (see Killeen,
2005), Z2 5 .92, and as N increased, F(2, 6) 5 123.0, p < .001,

Volume 19—Number 1

prep > .998, Z2 5 .98, but these two factors did not interact
signiﬁcantly, F(6, 18) < 1. The three curves displayed in Figure
2a are indeed nearly parallel.
In Experiment 2, we found, again, a strong main effect of ISI,
F(3, 9) 5 151.1, p < .001, prep > .999, Z2 5 .98. However, because of the covariation of Ds and N, the overall level of performance was not better when N was 4 than when N was 12, unlike in
Experiment 1. Nevertheless, there was again no signiﬁcant interaction of N and ISI, F(3, 9) < 1. Figure 2b shows that nearly
identical results were obtained for the two values of N.
EXPERIMENT 3

When a pure tone is gated on or off abruptly rather than
smoothly, the resulting discontinuity produces spectral splatter
and is audible as a salient click. In Experiments 1 and 2, we

87

Auditory Change Detection

gated each chord with 20-ms amplitude ramps in order to avoid
such effects. Because of the ramps, however, the two chords
presented on a given trial were separated by an audible gap even
when the nominal ISI was 0 ms. In addition, the ramps still
produced, inevitably, some spectral splatter. Previous studies
have shown that the trace of a visual stimulus in iconic memory
is easily masked by a subsequent visual stimulus that is different
(Averbach & Coriell, 1961; Becker, Pashler, & Anstis, 2000;
Phillips, 1974). It is conceivable that in Experiments 1 and 2, an
echoic, iconlike trace of the ﬁrst chord was masked by the ramp
placed at the end of this chord, as well as by the initial ramp of
the next chord when the ISI was short. Masking might have been
produced by the ramps themselves, as well as by the associated
spectral splatter. If the echoic trace of the ﬁrst chord was
masked, performance would have been limited by the low capacity of short-term memory whatever the ISI. This hypothesis
accounts for the fact that d 0 depended on N even when the
nominal ISI was 0 ms.
We carried out Experiment 3 to determine if the ramps used in
Experiments 1 and 2 indeed had a deleterious effect on change
detection, especially when the nominal ISI was 0 ms.
Method
Participants
Two of the authors (L.D. and M.S.) and 2 audiometrically normal
students participated in the experiment. They were initially
trained in the task for at least 4 hr.
Stimuli and Procedure
As in Experiment 2, participants were asked to make same/
different judgments on pairs of 600-ms chords consisting of 4 or
12 pure tones presented at 65 dB SPL. The frequencies of the
tones forming the ﬁrst chord were selected exactly as before, and
the changes to be detected resulted again from a positive or
negative frequency shift in a randomly chosen component of the
ﬁrst chord. The direction of the shifts was again randomly varied,
but each shift now had a magnitude of 0.40 semitone. As in
Experiment 1, the possibility of shifting was not restricted to
inner components of the chord.
For each value of N (4 or 12), there were two experimental
conditions: ramped and nonramped. In the ramped condition,
the two chords presented on each trial were temporally contiguous (so that the nominal ISI was 0 ms), but they were gated on
and off with the same amplitude ramps used in Experiments 1
and 2. The initial phases of the tones were also manipulated as
before. The upper part of Figure 3 illustrates a ramped transition
for a single tone shifted in frequency.
In the nonramped condition, the two chords were also temporally contiguous, but there were no amplitude ramps around
the transition point. When no frequency shift occurred, the
listener was actually presented with a single, continuous chord
1,200 ms in duration. When the frequency of one tone was

88

Fig. 3. Transitions between a 210-Hz tone and a 320-Hz tone. The illustration at the top is an example of a ramped transition, and the illustration at the bottom is an example of a nonramped transition. The
arrows indicate the instant at which the frequency shift occurs.

shifted, the shift occurred instantaneously, after exactly 600 ms,
but always at an amplitude peak, as in the example given in
Figure 3 (lower illustration). The frequency shift produced no
discontinuity in the waveform, nor in its ﬁrst derivative. However, a discontinuity was produced in the waveform’s second
derivative, and this discontinuity generated some spectral
splatter.
Trials were arranged in blocks of 40, with N and the transition
type (ramped vs. nonramped) ﬁxed within each block. The four
possible types of blocks were run in counterbalanced order, 10
times for each listener.
Results and Discussion
We processed the data in the same manner as in Experiments 1
and 2. As Table 1 indicates, performance was better when the
value of N was 4 than when it was 12, and transition type affected
performance appreciably when N was equal to 4, but not when N
was equal to 12. The main effect of transition type was not statistically signiﬁcant, F(1, 3) 5 4.3, p 5 .13, prep 5 .78, Z2 5 .59,
but the main effect of N was signiﬁcant, F(1, 3) 5 12.3, p 5 .04,
prep 5 .89, Z2 5 .80, as was the interaction of the two factors,
F(1, 3) 5 15.7, p 5 .03, prep 5 .91, Z2 5 .84.
The most important ﬁnding is that when N was large (12),
performance was not markedly poorer in the ramped condition
TABLE 1
Mean Values of d 0 in Experiment 3
Number of tones
in each chord (N)
4
12

Condition
Ramped

Nonramped

1.74
1.34

2.19
1.47

Volume 19—Number 1

L. Demany et al.

than in the nonramped condition. This is remarkable because
the nonramped condition clearly minimized the negative
effects of memory limitations on change detection (although
it is conceivable that, in this condition, the small transient
spectral splatter produced by a frequency shift affected the
internal representation of the ﬁrst chord). The fact that
performance was nearly the same in the ramped condition
strongly suggests that the negative effects of memory limitations
were also minimized in the ramped condition. Therefore, the
results of this experiment do not support the hypothesis that in
Experiments 1 and 2, the observed effect of N when the nominal
ISI was 0 ms was due to a deleterious inﬂuence of the ramps on
memory.
When N was equal to 4, however, we found an advantage of the
nonramped condition over the ramped condition. This advantage presumably originated from the transient spectral splatter
produced by a frequency shift in the nonramped condition.
Detecting this transient spectral splatter was sufﬁcient for the
listener to know that the correct response was ‘‘different,’’ whereas in the ramped condition, the transition between the two
chords provided no cue. The spectral splatter was apparently
less detectable for 12-tone chords than for 4-tone chords,
probably because the 12-tone chords had much larger bandwidths.
EXPERIMENTS 4 AND 5

A successful same/different judgment on two successive (and
noncontiguous) chords may not require separate memory storage
of each of the ﬁrst chord’s component tones. The detection of a
frequency shift in one tone might instead be based on a global
cue (e.g., the average pitch of all the tones that make up a chord).
This is not implausible, because a sum of synchronous tones is
normally perceived as a single sound, within which individual
tones are difﬁcult to discern. Therefore, one might think that in
Experiments 1 and 2, increasing N did not really increase the
memory load of the task.
An alternative experimental paradigm, however, makes it
possible to study, without any ambiguity, the memory storage of
individual components of chords. In a previous study, Demany
and Ramos (2005) produced sound sequences consisting of a
chord followed by a single tone that was slightly higher or lower
in frequency than a randomly selected component of the chord.
Listeners were asked to identify the direction of this frequency
shift. Even though the components of the chords were difﬁcult to
discern individually, it appeared that many listeners could
perform the task rather easily. This paradoxical ﬁnding inspired
our design of Experiments 4 and 5, in which we used Demany
and Ramos’s task and manipulated the number of tones making
up the chord (N), as well as the ISI. Because the listeners had to
make comparisons between tones rather than between chords,
it was certain that increasing N increased the memory load of
the task.

Volume 19—Number 1

Method
Participants
Experiment 4 was performed with 3 listeners, including 2 of the
authors (W.T. and M.S.). Experiment 5 was performed with 4
listeners, also including 2 of the authors (L.D. and M.S.). Each
listener was initially trained on the task for at least 4 hr.
Stimuli and Procedure
On each trial, a chord of N pure tones was followed by a single
pure tone (T), and the task was to indicate if Twas higher or lower
than the closest component of the chord (see Fig. 1, right side).
All components of the chord were, a priori, equally likely to be
the closest to T, and the correct response was equiprobably
‘‘higher’’ or ‘‘lower.’’ The ISI separating T from the chord was 0,
250, 750, or 2,000 ms. We constructed the chords in the same
manner as in Experiments 1 and 2, except that adjacent components were now separated by a ﬁxed frequency interval,
namely, 5 semitones in Experiment 4 and 8.5 semitones in Experiment 5. As before, each chord was randomly positioned in a
5-octave frequency range, from 125 to 4000 Hz. In Experiment
4, N was equal to 12, 7, or 4, and T was at a ﬁxed frequency
distance (Ds 5 1 semitone) from the closest component of the
chord. In Experiment 5, N was equal to 7, 4, 2, or 1 (in the latter
case, the ‘‘chords’’ were in fact pure tones), and Ds depended on
both N and the listener, as indicated in Figure 2; the goal of this
manipulation of Ds was to obtain a similar overall level of performance for the various values of N, as in Experiment 2.
The procedure was identical to that used in Experiments 1 and
2. Thus, we ran 480 trials for each listener and condition.
Results
The results of Experiment 4 (see Fig. 2c) were similar to those
of Experiment 1. That is, d 0 decreased signiﬁcantly as the ISI
increased, F(3, 6) 5 11.3, p 5 .007, prep 5 .96, Z2 5 .85, and as
N increased, F(2, 4) 5 78.5, p < .001, prep 5 .99, Z2 5 .98,
but these two factors did not interact signiﬁcantly, F(6, 12) 5
1.2, p 5 .35, prep 5 .60, Z2 5 .38.
In Experiment 5 (see Fig. 2d), ISI again had a signiﬁcant main
effect, F(3, 9) 5 8.5, p 5 .005, prep 5 .97, Z2 5 .74. Because of
the covariation of N and Ds, N had no signiﬁcant main effect,
F(3, 9) < 1. The interaction of N and ISI was signiﬁcant, F(9, 27) 5
2.6, p 5 .03, prep 5 .92, Z2 5 .46. However, Figure 2 shows that
this small interaction effect is due to the fact that d 0 was unexpectedly high when N was equal to 1 and the ISI was 0 ms.
Paradoxically, therefore, the deleterious effect of longer ISIs on
performance was somewhat stronger when N was equal to 1 than
when N was larger.
GENERAL DISCUSSION

We found that the ability to detect a frequency change in one
component of a chord of N tones depends on N and also on the

89

Auditory Change Detection

ISI. In themselves, these two observations are not surprising.
Our main—and more surprising—ﬁnding is that an increase in
the ISI does not have a more deleterious effect on performance
when N is large (e.g., 12) than when N is small (4, or even 1). The
effect of N is not smaller when the ISI is 0 ms than when the ISI
is as long as 2 s. This ﬁnding implies that the effect of N on
change-detection performance is unrelated to memory and is
instead entirely due to sensory or attentional factors. Given that
an increase in N nonetheless increases the memory load of the task
when the ISI is not 0 ms (an obvious fact for Experiments 4 and 5),
we conclude that the memory system involved in the auditory
detection of frequency changes apparently has no capacity limit.
This appears to be true for retention delays of at least 2 s.
Visual change detection is quite different. As mentioned in
our introductory section, humans do possess a high-capacity
visual memory. However, the duration of storage in this iconic
memory system does not exceed about 100 ms. Phillips
and Singer (1974; see also Stelmach et al., 1984) proposed a
plausible neural model for the detection of visual changes based
on iconic memory. In this model, change detection depends on
transient neural responses to a sudden increase (‘‘on’’ responses)
or decrease (‘‘off’’ responses) of luminance at a given location on
the retina. The model holds that locally, off-activity inhibits
on-activity, and vice versa, an idea that is consistent with
physiological data. Iconic memory is accounted for by the time
course of the transient off responses and the time course of the
inhibition of on responses by off responses. This mechanism
allows an observer to detect local changes in a complex image
automatically (i.e., without an active search) if, and only if, the
ISI is shorter than about 100 ms.
In contrast, our data suggest that local changes in a sound
spectrum are detected in the same manner when the ISI is close
to 0 ms as when it is as long as 2 s. Thus, it seems unlikely that a
change-detection device similar to the model proposed
by Phillips and Singer (1974) exists in the auditory system.
Nevertheless, spectral changes can be detected automatically.
Demany and Ramos (2005; see also Demany & Semal, in press)
demonstrated that a sequence of two tones differing in frequency
can elicit a percept of pitch shift when the ﬁrst tone is included
in a chord and not consciously perceived. This ﬁnding provides
strong evidence for the presence of automatic frequency-shift
detectors. The participants in the study reported here probably
made use of such detectors, because all participants reported
informally that the components of the chord initially presented
within a trial were not audible individually when N was larger
than 3.
Overall, our results indicate that auditory change detection is
only weakly limited by memory factors. This ﬁnding, along with
the fact that a difference between two tones can be consciously
perceived even when the ﬁrst tone has not been consciously
perceived (Demany & Ramos, 2005), is at odds with the idea that
humans exhibit change deafness (Eramudugolla et al., 2005;
Vitevitch, 2003). The alleged evidence for change deafness

90

comes from experiments in which the changes to be detected
were much more complex than those presented in our study. A
crucial difference is that the prechange and postchange stimuli
were not static sounds, as in our study, but sound sequences—
or mixtures of sound sequences—within which spectral changes
were already present. The static stimuli we used are more similar
to the static images typically used in demonstrations of change
blindness (e.g., O’Regan, Rensink, & Clark, 1999; Rensink
et al., 1997). Let us emphasize that the detection of small
frequency changes, such as those presented in our study, undoubtedly involves a sensory memory sytem. A change between sequential stimuli, such as those used by Eramudugolla
et al. (2005), is more likely to be detected by means of a categorical (verbal) form of memory. We suspect that the ‘‘deafness’’
of the listeners tested by Eramudugolla et al. had, in fact, little
to do with audition per se, but rather reﬂected limitations of
short-term verbal memory (Cowan, 2001).
In summary, the present ﬁndings indicate that, as regards
change detection, the auditory counterpart of iconic memory has
a storage duration that is at least 20 times the storage duration
of iconic memory. One can make sense of this important difference between audition and vision. As mentioned earlier, iconic
memory is retinotopic. That is, the iconic trace of a visual
stimulus is tied to the position of its retinal projection, so that a
mere displacement of the retinal projection modiﬁes the content
of iconic memory, exactly as if the distal stimulus had changed
(Phillips, 1974). Thus, an eye movement is sufﬁcient to change
the iconic representation of a given stimulus. Because visual
saccades are frequent, a difference between two retinal images
separated by a substantial time interval is likely to stem from the
observer’s own activity, rather than from a change in the visual
scene itself. Consequently, it would be superﬂuous, or even
disadvantageous, to possess an iconic memory system permitting detection of changes across long ISIs. By contrast, the motor
activity of a human listener has no major effect on the cochlear
representation of an auditory scene; a change in the excitation of
the cochlea is typically due to a change in the distal stimulus.
Therefore, it is clearly advantageous to possess a high-capacity
auditory memory by means of which local spectral changes can
be detected across long ISIs.

REFERENCES
Alvarez, G.A., & Cavanagh, P. (2004). The capacity of visual shortterm memory is set both by visual information load and by
number of objects. Psychological Science, 15, 106–111.
Averbach, E., & Coriell, A.S. (1961). Short-term memory in vision.
Bell Systems Technical Journal, 40, 309–328.
Becker, M.W., Pashler, H., & Anstis, S.M. (2000). The role of iconic
memory in change-detection tasks. Perception, 29, 273–286.
Bregman, A.S. (1990). Auditory scene analysis. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Cowan, N. (1984). On short and long auditory stores. Psychological
Bulletin, 96, 341–370.

Volume 19—Number 1

L. Demany et al.

Cowan, N. (2001). The magical number 4 in short-term memory: A
reconsideration of mental storage capacity [Target article and
commentaries]. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 24, 87–185.
Demany, L., & Ramos, C. (2005). On the binding of successive sounds:
Perceiving shifts in nonperceived pitches. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 117, 833–841.
Demany, L., & Semal, C. (in press). The role of memory in auditory
perception. In W.A. Yost, A.N. Popper, & R.R. Fay (Eds.), Auditory perception of sound sources. New York: Springer.
Eramudugolla, R., Irvine, D.R.F., McAnally, K.I., Martin, R.L., &
Mattingley, J.B. (2005). Directed attention eliminates ‘change
deafness’ in complex auditory scenes. Current Biology, 15, 1108–
1113.
Killeen, P.R. (2005). An alternative to null-hypothesis signiﬁcance
tests. Psychological Science, 16, 345–353.
Luck, S.J., & Vogel, E.K. (1997). The capacity of visual working
memory for features and conjunctions. Nature, 390, 279–281.
Massaro, D.W., & Loftus, G.R. (1996). Sensory and perceptual storage.
In E.L. Bjork & R.A. Bjork (Eds.), Memory (pp. 67–99). San
Diego, CA: Academic Press.
O’Regan, J.K., Rensink, R.A., & Clark, J.J. (1999). Change-blindness
as a result of ‘mudsplashes.’ Nature, 398, 34.
Pashler, H. (1988). Familiarity and visual change detection. Perception
& Psychophysics, 44, 369–378.
Phillips, W.A. (1974). On the distinction between sensory storage
and short-term visual memory. Perception & Psychophysics, 16,
283–290.

Volume 19—Number 1

Phillips, W.A., & Singer, W. (1974). Function and interaction of On
and Off transients in vision. Experimental Brain Research, 19,
493–506.
Pressnitzer, D., & Hupé, J.M. (2006). Temporal dynamics of auditory
and visual bistability reveal common principles of perceptual
organization. Current Biology, 16, 1351–1357.
Rensink, R.A., O’Regan, J.K., & Clark, J.J. (1997). To see or not to see:
The need for attention to perceive changes in scenes. Psychological Science, 8, 368–373.
Simons, D.J., & Levin, D.T. (1997). Change blindness. Trends in
Cognitive Sciences, 1, 261–267.
Stelmach, L.B., Bourassa, C.M., & Di Lollo, V. (1984). Detection of
stimulus change: The hypothetical roles of visual transient responses. Perception & Psychophysics, 35, 245–255.
Visscher, K.M., Kaplan, E., Kahana, M.J., & Sekuler, R. (2007). Auditory short-term memory behaves like visual short-term memory.
PLoS Biology, 5, e56.
Vitevitch, M.S. (2003). Change deafness: The inability to detect
changes between two voices. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Human Perception and Performance, 29, 333–342.
Wertheimer, M. (1923). Untersuchungen zur Lehre von der Gestalt.
Psychologische Forschung, 4, 301–350.

(RECEIVED 5/11/07; REVISION ACCEPTED 7/1/07)

91

