Psychological Science
http://pss.sagepub.com/

Keeping One's Distance: The Influence of Spatial Distance Cues on Affect and Evaluation
Lawrence E. Williams and John A. Bargh
Psychological Science 2008 19: 302
DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-9280.2008.02084.x
The online version of this article can be found at:
http://pss.sagepub.com/content/19/3/302

Published by:
http://www.sagepublications.com

On behalf of:

Association for Psychological Science

Additional services and information for Psychological Science can be found at:
Email Alerts: http://pss.sagepub.com/cgi/alerts
Subscriptions: http://pss.sagepub.com/subscriptions
Reprints: http://www.sagepub.com/journalsReprints.nav
Permissions: http://www.sagepub.com/journalsPermissions.nav

>> Version of Record - Mar 1, 2008
What is This?

Downloaded from pss.sagepub.com at OhioLink on August 13, 2014

P SY CH OL OG I C AL S CIE N CE

Research Article

Keeping One’s Distance
The Inﬂuence of Spatial Distance Cues on Affect and
Evaluation
Lawrence E. Williams and John A. Bargh
Yale University

ABSTRACT—Current

conceptualizations of psychological
distance (e.g., construal-level theory) refer to the degree of
overlap between the self and some other person, place, or
point in time. We propose a complementary view in which
perceptual and motor representations of physical distance
inﬂuence people’s thoughts and feelings without reference
to the self, extending research and theory on the effects of
distance into domains where construal-level theory is silent. Across four experiments, participants were primed
with either spatial closeness or spatial distance by plotting
an assigned set of points on a Cartesian coordinate plane.
Compared with the closeness prime, the distance prime
produced greater enjoyment of media depicting embarrassment (Study 1), less emotional distress from violent
media (Study 2), lower estimates of the number of calories
in unhealthy food (Study 3), and weaker reports of emotional attachments to family members and hometowns
(Study 4). These results support a broader conceptualization of distance-mediated effects on judgment and affect.
Can the relative placement of salt and pepper shakers on one’s
table inﬂuence feelings of emotional attachment to one’s dinner
companion? People often look to their environment for clues for
how they should feel, as a natural part of the situational appraisal process (e.g., Lazarus, 1991; Trope, 1986). Indeed, those
who practice feng shui believe that the placement of objects
within a room, and the space between them, can directly affect
people’s mental lives (e.g., Darby, 2007). A cluttered room, with
insufﬁcient space between objects, is believed to clutter one’s
thoughts, whereas a room where there is ordered space between
objects is believed to keep one’s thoughts clear. Is this simply
mysticism, or can the amount of space between objects genuAddress correspondence to Lawrence Williams, Department of Psychology, Yale University, New Haven, CT 06520-8205, e-mail: lawrence.
williams@yale.edu.

302

inely affect people’s judgments and feelings? Informed by theories of embodiment and conceptual development, the present
research examined the power of physical-distance cues to moderate people’s emotional experiences.
A NEW LOOK AT PSYCHOLOGICAL DISTANCE

The main framework of current theorizing about the nature of
psychological distance is construal-level theory (CLT; Trope &
Liberman, 2003). Research guided by this theory indicates that
people think about distant events more abstractly and proximal
events more concretely (Liberman & Trope, 1998; Trope & Liberman, 2003). Recent research has shown construal-level differences associated with various forms of psychological distance,
such as social distance inherent in power hierarchies and spatial
distance between one’s current and other locations (Fujita,
Henderson, Eng, Trope, & Liberman, 2006; Smith & Trope,
2006). When people feel more powerful, they tend to think
more abstractly (Smith & Trope, 2006). Similarly, when people
think about an event that occurs near where they live, their
mental representations of the event are concrete, but when they
think about an event that occurs far away, their mental representations of that event are abstract (Fujita et al., 2006). It is important to note that these effects involve the self as a reference
point vis-à-vis some other place, person, or point in time.
Although construal-level theorists contend that temporal,
social, and spatial distance are all contained under the umbrella
of ‘‘psychological distance’’ (Liberman, Trope, & Stephan, in
press; Trope & Liberman, 2003), we argue that spatial distance
is not simply a derivative of psychological distance. Indeed, it is
very much the other way around. Spatial concepts such as ‘‘nearfar’’ are among the ﬁrst concepts available to preverbal children
(Clark, 1973; Mandler, 1992), being present at 3 to 4 months of
age (Leslie, 1982). Spatial relations are easy for infants to parse
because the relevant information is readily available to the
senses, whereas abstract concepts related to internal states are
more difﬁcult to understand (Mandler, 1992). For developing

Copyright
rpss.sagepub.com
2008 Association
for Psychological
Science
Downloaded
from
at OhioLink
on August 13, 2014

Volume 19—Number 3

Lawrence E. Williams and John A. Bargh

children, analyzing visual displays is much easier than analyzing their own internal states; indeed, accurate introspection
is often difﬁcult for adults (e.g., Wilson, 2002). Accordingly, we
argue that a primitive understanding of physical distance is the
foundation for the later-developed concept of psychological
distance, given humans’ ‘‘pervasive tendency to conceptualize
the mental world by analogy to the physical world, rather than
the other way around’’ (Mandler, 1992, p. 596).
Evidence for the metaphoric application of spatial concepts
was obtained by Boroditsky (2000), who showed that activating
spatial concepts such as ‘‘forward’’ and ‘‘up’’ inﬂuenced judgments in the more abstract domain of temporal relations. Further, recent studies in embodied social cognition have shown
effects of spatial metaphors on judgments. Judgments of the
affective valence of words are facilitated when positive words
are presented in the upper half of a computer screen and negative words are presented in the lower half (‘‘up’’ is ‘‘good,’’
‘‘down’’ is ‘‘bad’’; Meier & Robinson, 2004; see also Clark,
1973). Also, people are more likely to understand two objects as
being in a power relationship if they are aligned vertically rather
than horizontally (i.e., one’s power over another; Schubert,
2005). These phenomena demonstrate how knowledge about
physical relations is projected onto other domains as an analogical means of understanding them, as theorized by Lakoff and
Johnson (1980) and other researchers (Fauconnier & Turner,
2002).
If physical-distance concepts are used as the analogical
bridge for the development of the concept of psychological
distance (Mandler, 1992), then physical distance broadly deﬁned (i.e., not only when the self is the reference point) should
inﬂuence people’s judgments and affective states. This should
be the case because physical-distance cues have adaptive signiﬁcance, a point that has been argued by major theorists in
psychology over the past century.
Spatial distance and affect are inextricably linked, because
the principle that ‘‘distance equals safety’’ is deeply ingrained in
humans’ biological makeup. Both Tolman (1932), in his pioneering work on cognitive maps in animals, and the evolutionary
epistemologist Campbell (1956, 1960) suggested that vision itself was an adaptation, enabling safer exploration of the environment at a distance by removing the need for physical contact
with unknown, potentially dangerous objects and organisms.
And in his classic work on attachment, Bowlby (1969) noted that
maintaining speciﬁc distance relations is critical for the survival
of animals and humans. In particular, he emphasized the adaptive value of the infant keeping close to its mother and monitoring its distance to her at all times in order to gain protection
from predators (see also Lorenz, 1962). Finally, recent ﬁndings in cognitive neuroscience conﬁrm that sensitivity to physical-distance information is built into the design and function of
the human brain, with information processing shifting from
forebrain to midbrain regions as a function of the spatial distance between oneself and a looming threat (Mobbs et al., 2007).

Volume 19—Number 3

Our account of the importance of physical-distance information is in harmony with major theories of early concept and social
development (e.g., Bowlby, 1969; Clark, 1973; Mandler, 1992).
Two important implications follow. First, the activation of spatial
representations of physical closeness and distance (i.e., between
any two objects, without reference to the self) should inﬂuence
people’s subjective experiences. Second, the activation of spatial-distance concepts should moderate the emotional impact of
subsequent stimuli, because of the adaptive signiﬁcance of physicaldistance relations between oneself, one’s caretakers, and potential predators. Critically, neither prediction follows from CLT’s
treatment of spatial distance.
In the studies reported here, we examined the effects of spatial
cues on people’s affective responses to and evaluations of emotionally evocative stimuli associated with either potential harm
or safety. We hypothesized that participants’ subjective experience will differ depending on whether they perceive relatively
close or relatively distant points in Cartesian space. In Studies 1
and 2, we examined the effects of this physical-distance manipulation on responses to embarrassing and violent media. In
Study 3, we expanded our investigation by examining the effects
of the distance manipulation on judgments concerning potentially dangerous, unhealthy food. Finally, in a stringent test of
the power of the physical-distance manipulation, in Study 4, we
assessed its effects on participants’ self-reported emotional attachments to signiﬁcant people and places in their lives.

STUDY 1

In this study, participants were primed with spatial closeness or
spatial distance using a Cartesian-plane coordinate system.
They then read an embarrassing book excerpt and rated the
extent to which they liked the excerpt. We hypothesized that
participants primed with distance would like the embarrassing
story more, and those primed with closeness would like the story
less, compared with people primed with an intermediate amount
of distance.
Method
Participants
Seventy-three undergraduates (41 female, 32 male) were randomly assigned to the three spatial-prime conditions.
Materials and Procedure
As a cover story, participants were told that the experimenters
were interested in obtaining feedback on materials for a new
type of standardized test. To produce spatial-distance cues, we
asked participants to mark off two points on a Cartesian plane
(see Fig. 1). Each participant was given one of three sets of
coordinates, which served as the closeness, intermediate, or
distance prime. The set of coordinates for the closeness prime,

Downloaded from pss.sagepub.com at OhioLink on August 13, 2014

303

Self-Reported Enjoyment

Spatial and Psychological Distance

7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
Closeness

Intermediate

Distance

Condition

Fig. 1. The grid used for spatial priming. Participants were told, ‘‘Please
locate the following points on this grid.’’ The coordinates were (2, 4) and
( 3, 1) in the closeness condition, (8, 3) and ( 6, 5) in the intermediate
condition, and (12, 10) and ( 11, 8) in the distance condition.

(2, 4) and ( 3, 1), were close to each other on the coordinate
plane. The coordinates for the distance prime, (12, 10) and
( 11, 8), were far from each other on the coordinate plane. The
coordinates for the intermediate prime, (8, 3) and ( 6, 5), were
roughly halfway between those used for the closeness and distance primes. In other words, within the frame of the Cartesian
plane, the points used in the closeness manipulation were relatively close to each other, and the points used in the distance
manipulation were relatively far apart.
Afterward, participants read an excerpt, taken from the book
Good in Bed (Weiner, 2001), that depicted embarrassment. In
this excerpt, the protagonist discovers a magazine article written
about her. The article, titled ‘‘Loving a Larger Woman,’’ was
written by the protagonist’s ex-boyfriend.
Participants answered three questions that assessed the extent to which they liked the excerpt. Each response was made
using a scale ranging from 1 (not at all) to 9 (extremely). Speciﬁcally, participants were asked: ‘‘How much did you enjoy the
passage?’’ ‘‘How interested might you be in reading more of the
story that the passage is from?’’ and ‘‘Did you ﬁnd the passage entertaining?’’ Responses to these three items were averaged into a
reliable index of liking (a 5 .88).
Finally, participants were probed for suspicion using the
funneled debrieﬁng technique (Bargh & Chartrand, 2000).
Three participants indicated suspicion that the Cartesian-plane
task primed notions of distance (though they showed no awareness of the study’s hypothesis); their data were removed from the
analyses.

Results and Discussion
Do spatial cues inﬂuence the extent to which people enjoy an
embarrassing story? As Figure 2 shows, participants primed
with spatial distance enjoyed the excerpt more than those

304

Fig. 2. Mean self-reported enjoyment of the book passage depicting
embarrassment, in the closeness, intermediate, and distance conditions.
Error bars represent standard errors of the means.

primed with spatial closeness. An analysis of variance (ANOVA)
revealed that the three groups differed signiﬁcantly in how much
they liked the embarrassing story, F(2, 67) 5 3.14, prep 5 .88,
Z2 5 .09. Next, we conducted a planned contrast analysis using
weights of 1, 0, and 1 for a linear contrast, and 1, 12, 1 for
a quadratic contrast, for the closeness, intermediate, and distance conditions, respectively. These contrast weights allowed
us to test the speciﬁc hypothesis that participants in the distance
condition enjoyed the excerpt more than those in the intermediate condition, who in turn enjoyed it more than those in
the closeness condition. We expect a nonsigniﬁcant quadratic
contrast but a signiﬁcant linear contrast. Indeed, the quadratic
contrast was not signiﬁcant, t(67) 5 0.65, n.s., and the linear
contrast indicated that people primed with closeness (M 5 3.99)
liked the excerpt depicting embarrassment less than people
primed with an intermediate amount of distance (M 5 4.33),
who in turn liked the excerpt less than people primed with
distance (M 5 5.35), t(67) 5 2.41, prep 5 .93. The results support our hypothesis that the mere activation of physical-distance
concepts (near vs. far), without explicit reference to the self or
any social concepts, is sufﬁcient to inﬂuence people’s evaluations.
One alternative explanation for the pattern of results found in
Study 1 is that the spatial prime inﬂuenced participants at the
response level, without affecting their actual liking of the excerpt depicting embarrassment. Being primed with greater numerical magnitudes may have led participants to respond
with larger numbers on the rating scales. Research on anchoring
effects has demonstrated that simply asking people to consider
objects with large magnitudes inﬂuences their subsequent responses on judgment tasks (Mussweiler & Strack, 2001; Oppenheimer, LeBoeuf, & Brewer, 2008; Tversky & Kahneman, 1974).
Study 2 addressed this concern by examining the effects of
spatial priming in a context in which the manipulation and dependent measures were expected to be inversely related.

Downloaded from pss.sagepub.com at OhioLink on August 13, 2014

Volume 19—Number 3

Lawrence E. Williams and John A. Bargh

STUDY 2

Method
Participants
Forty-two undergraduates (26 female, 16 male) were randomly
assigned to the three spatial-prime conditions.
Materials and Procedure
The materials and procedure were identical to those used in
Study 1, with two exceptions.
First, instead of reading an embarrassing story, participants
read a violent excerpt taken from the book Survivor (Palahniuk,
1999). The excerpt featured a story of two brothers who had just
survived a car accident. One of the brothers was horribly disﬁgured, and he begged to be beaten to death with a rock. We
pilot-tested this passage with a separate set of 29 participants.
On a single item tapping liking, from 1 (not at all) to 9 (extremely), pilot-test participants rated this passage negatively
(M 5 3.21).
Second, instead of rating liking after reading the excerpt,
participants rated their current positive and negative emotion
using the Positive and Negative Affect Schedule (a 5 .72;
Watson, Clark, & Tellegen, 1988).
No participants indicated any awareness of the purpose of the
priming manipulation or the experimental hypothesis.
Results and Discussion
Do spatial cues inﬂuence the extent to which people ﬁnd aversive media emotionally distressing? An ANOVA of the effect
of spatial condition revealed that the three groups differed
signiﬁcantly in their reports of negative affect, F(2, 39) 5 4.37,
prep 5 .93, Z2 5 .18. We used the same linear and quadratic
contrast weights used in Study 1. Again, the quadratic contrast
was not signiﬁcant, t(39) 5 1.54, n.s.; the linear contrast
showed that participants primed with closeness reported signiﬁcantly more negative affect (M 5 2.31) than participants
primed with distance (M 5 1.75), t(39) 5 2.62, prep 5 .94.
Participants’ reports of positive affect did not vary across conditions, all Fs < 1. This null ﬁnding may be due to the fact that
some people feel positive following exposure to violent media,
whereas others do not (Andrade & Cohen, in press). Alternatively, the null ﬁnding for positive affect may have been due to
the fact that there is a steeper gradient for avoiding negative
emotions than for approaching positive emotions, such that as
one (ﬁguratively) moves farther away from a stimulus, the negative effects of that stimulus will be muted to a greater degree
than the positive aspects of that same stimulus (cf. Miller, 1961).
This ﬁnding provides further support for the hypothesis that
spatial cues can affect people’s response to aversive media without their awareness. After exposure to violent media, people
primed with a sense of spatial distance report less negative affect
than people primed with a sense of spatial closeness. In the same

Volume 19—Number 3

way that people are less emotionally affected by an event if the
event is 200 mi rather than 200 ft away (cf. Blanchard et al.,
2004), so does distance priming mitigate the emotional impact of
aversive media.
Overall, Studies 1 and 2 support the hypothesis that perceptual experiences with physical distances, without explicit reference to the self, affect people’s evaluations of and affective
responses to emotionally evocative stimuli, and are consistent
with emerging ﬁndings of embodied social cognition. In our view,
priming spatial distance mutes the emotional aspects of events
or stimuli because of the hard-wired association between distance and safety (e.g., Mobbs et al., 2007). To demonstrate this
muting effect more directly, in Study 3 we tested the effect of
perceptions of spatial distance and closeness on people’s estimations of the number of calories in unhealthy food.
STUDY 3

In this study, we again primed people with a sense of spatial
closeness or spatial distance using a Cartesian plane. We then
asked them to estimate the number of calories contained in
healthy and unhealthy foods. This design allowed us to pit our
account against CLT. In our view, because caloric content is an
affect-laden, potentially dangerous feature of unhealthy food, we
hypothesized that people primed with distance would estimate
that unhealthy food contains fewer calories, compared with people
primed with closeness. We did not expect distance priming to
inﬂuence people’s estimations of the number of calories in healthy
food, because for such foods, the (low) number of calories is an
affectively mild feature. Thus, we expected an interactive effect of
spatial-prime condition and food type on people’s judgments of
caloric content. However, from a CLT perspective, calories are a
low-level, peripheral feature of healthy and unhealthy food alike.
Thus, if anything, CLT would predict only a main effect of spatialprime condition.

Method
Participants
Fifty-nine adults from the New Haven community (31 female, 28
male) participated in a 3 (spatial prime: closeness vs. intermediate vs. distance)  2 (food type: healthy vs. unhealthy) mixed
design, with spatial-prime condition as the between-subjects
factor and food type as the within-subjects factor.
Materials and Procedure
The priming procedure was identical to that used in Studies 1
and 2. Afterward, participants were given a list of 10 foods. Five
of the foods were relatively healthy (yogurt, oatmeal, brown rice,
apple, baked potato), and the remaining foods were relatively
unhealthy (ice cream, french fries, potato chips, chocolate bar,
cheeseburger). Participants were asked to estimate the number of

Downloaded from pss.sagepub.com at OhioLink on August 13, 2014

305

Spatial and Psychological Distance

calories in a single serving of each food. Ratings on this measure
were internally consistent across the 10 food types (a 5 .75).
No participants indicated any awareness of the purpose of the
priming manipulation or the experimental hypothesis.

Results and Discussion
Does nonconscious activation of spatial-distance concepts inﬂuence people’s estimates of the calories in healthy versus unhealthy foods? We found an interaction between spatial-prime
condition and food type in a repeated measures ANOVA, F(2,
56) 5 3.36, prep 5 .89, Z2 5 .10 (see Fig. 3). Follow-up simpleeffects analyses suggested that participants in the distance
condition judged unhealthy food as containing fewer calories
(M 5 271.6) than did participants in the closeness condition
(M 5 391.3), F(2, 56) 5 5.62, prep 5 .96. Notably, the mean
calorie estimates of healthy foods did not differ across groups,
F(2, 56) 5 0.12, n.s. This interaction pattern suggests that
priming spatial distance reduces sensitivity to the affect-laden
features of unhealthy food and provides further evidence for the
notion that distance reduces the affective intensity of stimuli.
In Studies 1 through 3, we examined the effects of spatial
closeness and distance on people’s responses to aversive media
and unhealthy food, domains in which feelings of distance appear to play important roles in determining how people feel, and
how they evaluate their experiences. In Study 4, we shifted our
focus to evaluative targets that are a primary source of affect
(both positive and negative) in one’s life. To stringently test our
hypothesis that spatial cues can manipulate people’s judgments
and feelings, we examined the effects of the spatial primes on the
strength of people’s self-reported attachments to chronic, central, and important sources of affect and identity: their family
and hometown.
STUDY 4

Estimated Caloric Content

As in the previous studies, participants were primed with spatial
closeness or spatial distance using a Cartesian plane. They then
500
400

Closeness
Intermediate
Distance

300
200
100
0
Healthy Food

Unhealthy Food

Fig. 3. Mean estimates of caloric content by food type and spatial-prime
condition. Error bars represent standard errors of the means.

306

were asked to rate the strength of their bonds to their family
members and to their hometown. We hypothesized that participants primed with distance would report weaker attachments to
their family members and hometown, compared with participants primed with closeness.

Method
Participants
Eighty-four undergraduates (43 female, 41 male) were randomly
assigned to the three spatial-prime conditions.
Materials and Procedure
The cover story and priming procedure were identical to those
used in Studies 1 through 3. Following the prime, participants
were given a questionnaire asking them to rate the strength of
their bonds to their siblings, their parents, and their hometown,
using a scale that ranged from 1 (not at all strong) to 7 (extremely
strong). Responses to these three questions were averaged to
provide an index of emotional attachment to one’s nuclear family
and hometown (a 5 .50).
No participants indicated any awareness of the purpose of the
priming manipulation or the experimental hypothesis.

Results and Discussion
Do representations of the concept of physical distance inﬂuence
the extent to which people feel strong or weak bonds to their
family or hometown? An ANOVA revealed that the three spatialprime groups differed signiﬁcantly in the reported strength
of their bonds to their family and hometown, F(2, 81) 5 4.97,
prep 5 .95, Z2 5 .11. Again, using the contrast weights established
in Study 1, we examined the difference between participants
primed with closeness versus distance. The quadratic contrast was
not signiﬁcant, t(81) 5 1.36, n.s.; the linear contrast showed that
participants primed with distance reported weaker bonds to their
family and hometown (M 5 4.86), compared with participants
primed with closeness (M 5 5.61), t(81) 5 2.86, prep 5 .96.
When people are primed with a sense of spatial distance,
rather than closeness, they report weaker bonds to their siblings,
parents, and hometown. These results suggest that cues to spatial distance increase feelings of emotional distance—that is,
the emotional attachment people feel between themselves and
other psychologically relevant entities. Thus, people’s judgments of the strength of their emotional attachments to important
aspects of their social world are directly inﬂuenced by simple
physical-distance cues. CLT is silent regarding these effects, as
CLT does not predict whether people’s attachment to their family
or hometown will be associated with high- or low-level construals. Along with Studies 1 and 3, Study 4 suggests that spatial
distance, which can be manipulated without referring to the self,
can meaningfully inﬂuence people’s affective judgments.

Downloaded from pss.sagepub.com at OhioLink on August 13, 2014

Volume 19—Number 3

Lawrence E. Williams and John A. Bargh

GENERAL DISCUSSION

Plotting close or distant points on a Cartesian plane had a demonstrable impact on people’s evaluations and emotional selfreports. This suggests that perceptual and motor representations
of spatial distance can inﬂuence people’s phenomenal experience, without explicit self-reference. Relative to priming people
with spatial closeness, priming people with spatial distance
muted the emotional impact of ﬁction, leading to more enjoyment of media depicting embarrassment and less emotional
distress from media depicting violence. Priming spatial distance
also inﬂuenced affective judgments, producing lower estimates
of the caloric content of unhealthy food, but not healthy food.
Perhaps most strikingly, priming distance through this unobtrusive method decreased the reported strength of emotional
attachments people felt between themselves and their family
and hometown. To our knowledge, the present studies are the
ﬁrst to demonstrate the effects of physical-distance cues on
people’s judgments and emotional experiences.
Our goal was to extend current theory on spatial distance by
demonstrating the pervasive manner in which spatial cues can
affect people. Further investigations are needed to home in on
the speciﬁc mechanism by which spatial priming inﬂuences
people’s feelings and evaluations. At ﬁrst blush, one may be
tempted to look to CLT, according to which the effects of spatial
manipulations on people’s judgments and feelings are mediated
by changes in construal level: Greater distance is associated
with abstraction and high-level construals, whereas reduced
distance is associated with attention to concrete details and lowlevel construals (Trope & Liberman, 2003). However, some of
the present data appear to be inconsistent with this view, as CLT
does not account for the interaction pattern obtained in Study 3.
Given the developmental primacy of spatial concepts, and the
deeply ingrained association between distance and safety in the
human brain, we speculate that the representation of spatial
distance between two arbitrary objects (in our case, two points
on a Cartesian plane) automatically activates an abstract representation of the distance concept, which can alter responses to
the world. People may nonconsciously use information about
spatial closeness and spatial distance within the general environment to simulate psychological distances between themselves and other relevant variables (Barsalou, 1999; Niedenthal,
Barsalou, Winkielman, Krauth-Gruber, & Ric, 2005). Future
investigations should specify the mechanism by which these
spatial-priming effects occur.
In conclusion, the basic concept of spatial distance has profound effects on the cognitive processes involved in appraisal
and affect, effects that are beyond the purview of CLT. Feelings
of distance can moderate the emotional intensity of stimuli, and
can be activated by physical cues without reference to the self.
These effects reveal the fundamental importance of distance
cues in the physical environment for shaping people’s judgments
and affective experiences, and highlight the ease with which

Volume 19—Number 3

aspects of the physical environment (and the spatial relations
therein) can activate feelings of closeness or distance without
one’s awareness.

Acknowledgments—This research was supported by a National Science Foundation Graduate Research Fellowship to
Williams and by a grant from the National Institute of Mental
Health (R01-MH60767) to Bargh. We thank Brad Bushman,
Nira Liberman, Ezequiel Morsella, Eric Uhlmann, and four
anonymous reviewers for their helpful comments on an earlier
draft.

REFERENCES
Andrade, E.B., & Cohen, J.B. (in press). On the consumption of negative feelings. Journal of Consumer Research.
Bargh, J.A., & Chartrand, T.L. (2000). The mind in the middle: A
practical guide to priming and automaticity research. In H.T. Reis
& C.M. Judd (Eds.), Handbook of research methods in social and
personality psychology (pp. 253–285). New York: Cambridge University Press.
Barsalou, L.W. (1999). Perceptual symbol systems. Behavioral and
Brain Sciences, 22, 577–609.
Blanchard, E.B., Kuhn, E., Rowell, D.L., Hickling, E.J., Wittrock, D.,
Rogers, R.L., et al. (2004). Studies of the vicarious traumatization
of college students by the September 11th attacks: Effects of
proximity, exposure and connectedness. Behaviour Research and
Therapy, 42, 191–205.
Boroditsky, L. (2000). Metaphoric structuring: Understanding time
through spatial metaphors. Cognition, 75, 1–28.
Bowlby, J. (1969). Attachment and loss. London: Hogarth Press.
Campbell, D.T. (1956). Perception as substitute trial and error. Psychological Review, 63, 330–342.
Campbell, D.T. (1960). Blind variation and selective retention in
creative thought as in other knowledge structures. Psychological
Review, 67, 380–400.
Clark, H.H. (1973). Space, time, semantics, and the child. In T.E.
Moore (Ed.), Cognitive development and the acquisition of language (pp. 27–63). New York: Academic Press.
Darby, P. (2007). The feng shui doctor: Ancient skills for modern living.
New York: Sterling.
Fauconnier, G., & Turner, M. (2002). The way we think: Conceptual
blending and the mind’s hidden complexities. New York: Basic
Books.
Fujita, K., Henderson, M.D., Eng, J., Trope, Y., & Liberman, N. (2006).
Spatial distance and mental construal of social events. Psychological Science, 17, 278–282.
Lakoff, G., & Johnson, M. (1980). Metaphors we live by. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Lazarus, R.S. (1991). Cognition and motivation in emotion. American
Psychologist, 46, 352–367.
Leslie, A.M. (1982). The perception of causality in infants. Perception,
11, 173–186.
Liberman, N., & Trope, Y. (1998). The role of feasibility and desirability considerations in near and distant future decisions: A test
of temporal construal theory. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 75, 5–18.

Downloaded from pss.sagepub.com at OhioLink on August 13, 2014

307

Spatial and Psychological Distance

Liberman, N., Trope, Y., & Stephan, E. (in press). Psychological
distance. In A.W. Kruglanski & E.T. Higgins (Eds.), Social psychology: Handbook of basic principles (Vol. 2). New York: Guilford.
Lorenz, K. (1962). Kant’s doctrine of the a priori in the light of contemporary biology. General Systems, 7, 23–35.
Mandler, J.M. (1992). How to build a baby: II. Conceptual primitives.
Psychological Review, 99, 587–604.
Meier, B.P., & Robinson, M.D. (2004). Why the sunny side is up:
Associations between affect and vertical position. Psychological
Science, 15, 243–247.
Miller, N.E. (1961). Some recent studies of conﬂict behavior and
drugs. American Psychologist, 16, 12–24.
Mobbs, D., Petrovic, P., Marchant, J.L., Hassabis, D., Weiskopf, N.,
Seymour, B., et al. (2007). When fear is near: Threat imminence
elicits prefrontal-periaqueductal gray shifts in humans. Science,
317, 1079–1083.
Mussweiler, T., & Strack, F. (2001). Considering the impossible: Explaining the effects of implausible anchors. Social Cognition, 19,
145–160.
Niedenthal, P.M., Barsalou, L.W., Winkielman, P., Krauth-Gruber, S.,
& Ric, F. (2005). Embodiment in attitudes, social perception, and
emotion. Personality and Social Psychology Review, 9, 184–211.
Oppenheimer, D.M., LeBoeuf, R.A., & Brewer, N.T. (2008). Anchors
aweigh: A demonstration of cross-modality anchoring and magnitude priming. Cognition, 106, 13–26.
Palahniuk, C. (1999). Survivor. New York: W.W. Norton.

308

Schubert, T.W. (2005). Your highness: Vertical positions as perceptual
symbols of power. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
89, 1–21.
Smith, P.K., & Trope, Y. (2006). You focus on the forest when you’re in
charge of the trees: Power priming and abstract information
processing. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 90,
668–675.
Tolman, E.C. (1932). Purposive behavior in animals and men. New
York: Century.
Trope, Y. (1986). Identiﬁcation and inferential processes in dispositional attribution. Psychological Review, 93, 239–257.
Trope, Y., & Liberman, N. (2003). Temporal construal. Psychological
Review, 110, 403–421.
Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1974). Judgment under uncertainty:
Heuristics and biases. Science, 185, 1124–1130.
Watson, D., Clark, L.A., & Tellegen, A. (1988). Development and
validation of brief measures of positive and negative affect: The
PANAS scales. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 54,
1063–1070.
Weiner, J. (2001). Good in bed. New York: Pocket Books.
Wilson, T.D. (2002). Strangers to ourselves: Discovering the adaptive
unconscious. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

(RECEIVED 3/27/07; REVISION ACCEPTED 9/11/07)

Downloaded from pss.sagepub.com at OhioLink on August 13, 2014

Volume 19—Number 3

