P SY CH OL OG I C AL S CIE N CE

Research Report

Hedonic and Instrumental
Motives in Anger Regulation
Maya Tamir,1 Christopher Mitchell,1 and James J. Gross2
1

Boston College and 2Stanford University

ABSTRACT—What

motivates individuals to regulate their
emotions? One answer, which has been highlighted in
emotion-regulation research, is that individuals are motivated by short-term hedonic goals (e.g., the motivation to
feel pleasure). Another answer, however, is that individuals are motivated by instrumental goals (e.g., the motivation to perform certain behaviors). We suggest that both
answers have merit. To demonstrate the role instrumental
goals may play in emotion regulation, we pitted short-term
hedonic motives and instrumental motives against each
other, by testing whether individuals were motivated to
experience a potentially useful, albeit unpleasant, emotion. We found that (a) individuals preferred activities that
would increase their level of anger (but not their level of
excitement) when they were anticipating confrontational,
but not nonconfrontational, tasks and that (b) anger improved performance in a confrontational, but not a nonconfrontational, task. These findings support a functional
view of emotion regulation, and demonstrate that in certain contexts, individuals may choose to experience emotions that are instrumental, despite short-term hedonic
costs.
One prominent feature of emotions is their hedonic tone: Some
emotions are pleasant, others are unpleasant. Because individuals prefer pleasure over pain (Freud, 1926/1959), they are
generally motivated to increase pleasant and decrease unpleasant emotions. Emotions, however, are more than feelings.
They have instrumental aspects (Frijda, 1986). This suggests another motive for regulating emotions, namely, to increase useful
and decrease harmful emotions.
The investigation reported in this article tested whether instrumental motives for regulating emotions can trump short-term
hedonic motives. We pitted instrumental and hedonic motives

Address correspondence to Maya Tamir, Department of Psychology,
Boston College, 140 Commonwealth Ave., Chestnut Hill, MA 02467,
e-mail: tamirm@bc.edu.

324

against each other, asking whether individuals would choose to
experience an unpleasant emotion (i.e., anger) when it was likely
to be useful in an upcoming task.
WHY DO INDIVIDUALS REGULATE THEIR EMOTIONS?

Emotion regulation refers to individuals’ attempts to influence
their emotions (Gross, 2002). It is generally assumed that individuals seek to increase pleasant and decrease unpleasant
emotions (Larsen, 2000). Self-regulation, however, is not driven
exclusively by short-term hedonic considerations. Indeed, individuals often forgo immediate pleasure to maximize long-term
utility (Mischel, Shoda, & Rodriguez, 1989). Such instrumental
motives might play a role in the regulation of emotion (Parrott,
1993). Therefore, we endorse an instrumental approach to emotion regulation, according to which preferences for emotions
depend on the balance of their hedonic and instrumental
benefits in a given context (Tamir, 2005; Tamir, Chiu, & Gross,
2007).
The hedonic and instrumental benefits of emotions are separable. Both pleasant and unpleasant emotions can be useful in
specific contexts (e.g., Izard, 1990; Keltner & Gross, 1999).
Individuals may be motivated to increase pleasant emotions for
either their short-term hedonic or their instrumental benefits.
However, individuals may be motivated to increase unpleasant
emotions primarily for their instrumental benefits.
Empirical support for the idea that emotion regulation can be
motivated by instrumental considerations is currently scarce.
Therefore, this investigation examined whether individuals can
be motivated to increase their experience of potentially useful,
yet unpleasant, emotions. Specifically, we tested whether individuals would seek to increase their anger when they were expecting to engage in a task in which anger might be helpful.
HEDONIC AND INSTRUMENTAL ASPECTS OF ANGER

Anger is an unpleasant emotion. It arises when individuals feel
they are not attaining a goal because of another person’s improper action, yet feel capable of altering the situation (Frijda,

Copyright r 2008 Association for Psychological Science

Volume 19—Number 4

Maya Tamir, Christopher Mitchell, and James J. Gross

1986). To promote the defense of one’s resources, anger increases aggression (Frijda, 1986), which propels one to confront
others. Anger, therefore, promotes confrontational behaviors
(Parrott, 2001).
Although anger often leads to harmful consequences, it is
sometimes useful (Averill, 1983; Tiedens, 2001). The instrumental implications of anger depend on the context in which it is
experienced (Bonanno, 2001). Anger may offer instrumental
benefits when one pursues confrontational goals. However, anger is unlikely to offer instrumental benefits when one pursues
nonconfrontational goals.
Building on these assumptions, we considered two interrelated questions. First, might individuals be motivated to increase their anger when they are anticipating confrontational,
but not nonconfrontational, tasks? Second, does anger carry instrumental implications for performance in confrontational
versus nonconfrontational tasks? We expected individuals to try
to increase their level of anger, despite its unpleasant nature,
when they expected to perform a confrontational, but not a
nonconfrontational, task. We believed that such a preference
would be driven by instrumental considerations, as reflected in
subsequent performance. We expected anger to improve performance in a confrontational, but not nonconfrontational, task.
THE CURRENT INVESTIGATION

To test whether motives for emotion regulation depend on anticipated performance contexts, we examined the extent to
which individuals preferred to engage in activities that are likely
to induce certain emotions (Erber, Wegner, & Therriault, 1996;
Tamir, 2005). Because anger is unpleasant and arousing, we
compared preferences for anger with preferences for excitement,
which differs from anger in pleasantness, but is equivalent in
arousal.
Participants were told that before playing a computer game,
they would engage in another activity. They were then given
descriptions of games that differed in their confrontational nature. After reading each description, participants were given
examples of activities they could perform before playing the
game and rated the extent to which they would prefer to engage
in each activity. To ensure that emotional preferences were
motivated by the emotional tone of the activity rather than the
activity itself, we asked all participants to rate their preferences
for two distinct types of activities—namely, listening to music
and recalling past events. We expected participants to have
stronger preferences for all anger-inducing activities (relative to
excitement-inducing activities) when they were considering
confrontational, but not nonconfrontational, games.
We also tested the effect of anger on game performance.
Following an emotion induction (i.e., anger, excitement, or neutral), participants played a confrontational and a nonconfrontational computer game. As a control for individual differences
in baseline performance, participants played each game before

Volume 19—Number 4

and after the emotion induction. We expected participants in the
anger condition to perform better than other participants in the
confrontational, but not the nonconfrontational, game. Furthermore, we expected this performance pattern to be angerspecific (e.g., as indicated by increases in aggressive game play).
METHOD

Participants
Eighty-two male undergraduates (mean age 5 19.99 years) received research credits or $20 for participating.1
Materials
Game Scenarios
We created two confrontational game scenarios (e.g., the goal is
to strike members of a drug cartel) and two nonconfrontational
game scenarios (e.g., the goal is to spread peace and rebuild an
empire). A pilot test (N 5 10) confirmed that the confrontational
and nonconfrontational game scenarios were equivalent in how
engaging and interesting they seemed, Fs < 1. The confrontational scenarios were viewed as more confrontational (M 5 7.75)
than the others (M 5 2.65), F(1, 9) 5 87.02, p < .05.
Music
We selected eight exciting (e.g., ‘‘BimBamBum’’ by Xavier
Cugat), eight neutral (e.g., ‘‘Lava’’ by Boozoo), and six angry
(e.g., ‘‘Inquisition’’ by Apocalyptica) instrumental musical
segments; taken together, the selections in each category were
equivalent in length and familiarity to the selections in the other
categories. A pilot test (N 5 10) confirmed that participants
experienced greater excitement when listening to the exciting
(M 5 4.01) segments, compared with the angry (M 5 1.52) and
neutral (M 5 2.98) segments, t(9)s > 2.89, ps < .05, and greater
anger when listening to the angry (M 5 3.60) segments, compared with the exciting (M 5 0.06) and neutral (M 5 0.34)
segments, t(9)s > 6.01, ps < .05. Participants rated angry and
exciting music as equally arousing and more arousing than
neutral music (Ms 5 5.04, 4.73, and 3.50, respectively), t(9)s >
2.20, ps < .05. Angry music (M 5 2.85) was rated as less
pleasant than exciting (M 5 5.31) and neutral (M 5 4.98) music,
t(9)s > 5.91, ps < .05.
Selection Tasks
Music-Selection Task
In each trial, participants read a game scenario, listened to a
musical segment for 30 s, and rated the extent to which they
would prefer listening to this music before playing the game (1 5
not at all, 7 5 extremely). Each scenario was paired with three
1

Only male participants were included, because a pilot study revealed that
males had greater experience playing computer games than females did.

325

Hedonic and Instrumental Motives in Anger Regulation

angry, three exciting, and three neutral musical segments in a
random order, for a total of 36 trials.
Recall-Selection Task
In each trial, participants read a game scenario, followed by a
description of a type of event (e.g., ‘‘an event in which you were
angry, involving friends’’), and rated the extent to which they
would prefer recalling such an event before playing the game
(1 5 not at all, 7 5 extremely). As in previous research (Tamir,
2005), the event types varied by emotional tone (i.e., angry,
exciting, neutral) and content (i.e., involving friends vs.
strangers). Game scenarios and events were fully crossed and
presented in a random order, resulting in a total of 24 trials.
Computer Games
Participants did not play the games described in the scenarios.
Instead, Soldier of Fortune, a first-person shooter game, served
as a confrontational task. Diner Dash, a game in which players
guide a waitress serving customers, served as a nonconfrontational task. A pilot test (N 5 10) confirmed that the games were
equally interesting, engaging, and difficult, t(9)s < 1.67, p >
.40. In each game of Soldier of Fortune, the number of enemies
the player killed (i.e., ‘‘kills’’) and the number of times the player
was killed by enemies (i.e., ‘‘deaths’’) were recorded. We then
created an overall score for performance by subtracting the
number of deaths from the number of kills. For Diner Dash, we
recorded the total score, as provided by the game itself (based, in
part, on the number of customers served and customers’ satisfaction).

Preference Ratings

Procedure
Participants were told that the experiment concerned the relation between memory and computer games and that they would

either recall events from their past or perform an unrelated activity (e.g., listen to music) before playing games. Participants
completed the music- and recall-selection tasks and were then
randomly assigned to a music condition (i.e., angry, exciting, or
neutral) and to a game-order condition (i.e., confrontational first
and nonconfrontational second, or vice versa). Participants
played one round of the first game for 5 min, listened to music for
3 min, and then continued listening for 5 min while playing
another round. Next, they played the second game, following the
same procedure. Finally, participants listened to all the musical
segments they had rated earlier in the music-selection task and
rated how angry, excited, pleasant, and active they felt (1 5 not
at all, 5 5 extremely) when listening to the music.

RESULTS

Emotional Preferences
We predicted that participants would prefer anger-inducing
activities more than exciting or neutral activities when they were
expecting to play a confrontational game, but not a nonconfrontational game. Therefore, for each type of game, we averaged
preferences for listening to music and for recalling events from
memory. We then ran a repeated measures analysis of variance
(ANOVA) to test the Game Type (confrontational vs. nonconfrontational)  Emotion (exciting, neutral, angry)  Activity
Type (music, memory) interaction (all factors manipulated
within subjects). As expected, we found a significant Game Type
 Emotion interaction, F(2, 162) 5 192.89, p < .001 (see Fig.
1). Preferences for anger-inducing activities were higher than
preferences for exciting and neutral activities when participants
anticipated playing confrontational games. However, a reverse
pattern was found when participants anticipated playing nonconfrontational games. The Game Type  Emotion  Activity

5
4.5
4
3.5
3
2.5
2
1.5
1
Confrontational

Nonconfrontational
Context

Anger-Inducing Activities

Neutral Activities

Exciting Activities

Fig. 1. Preferences for anger-inducing, neutral, and exciting activities (i.e., listening to music and
recalling events) when anticipating performing confrontational and nonconfrontational tasks. Error
bars represent 1 SEM.

326

Volume 19—Number 4

Residual Performance

Maya Tamir, Christopher Mitchell, and James J. Gross

0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
− 0.1
− 0.2
− 0.3
− 0.4
− 0.5
Confrontational
Nonconfrontational
Game Type
Anger Condition

Neutral Condition

Excitement Condition

Fig. 2. Residual performance in the confrontational and nonconfrontational computer games, as a
function of music condition. Error bars represent 1 SEM.

Type interaction was not significant, F < 1.01. Thus, preferences for emotion-inducing activities depended on the emotional tone, rather than the type, of the activity. This was
confirmed in t tests of simple effects, t(81)s > 4.20, ps < .05,
preps > .99.
Thus, before completing a task in which anger could be useful,
individuals sought to increase their anger by engaging in angerinducing activities rather than pleasant or neutral ones. These
preferences were reversed when individuals expected to perform a task in which anger was unlikely to be useful.

Effects of Emotion on Performance
Confirming that the music elicited the intended emotions during
task performance, repeated measures ANOVAs revealed that
participants found the angry music to be less pleasant than the
neutral and exciting music (Ms 5 1.67, 3.09, and 3.16); it was
also more anger inducing (Ms 5 2.63, 1.30, and 1.18), and less
exciting (Ms 5 2.43, 2.63, and 3.44), t(81)s < 2.7, ps < .05,
preps > .96. Angry and exciting musical selections were more
arousing than neutral selections (Ms 5 3.22, 3.56, and 2.41),
t(81)s > 3.98, ps < .05, preps > .99.
We standardized total performance scores in each round
within each game. Because preinduction performance and postinduction performance were significantly correlated (rs 5 .54
and .63, ps < .05, in the confrontational and nonconfrontational
games, respectively), we created residual performance scores by
predicting postinduction performance from preinduction performance within each game and subtracting predicted from
actual scores (Robinson, in press). Thus, we obtained a separate
residual score for overall performance in each game.
These scores were entered in a repeated measures ANOVA, in
which game (confrontational vs. nonconfrontational) was a twolevel within-subjects variable and music condition (anger, neu-

Volume 19—Number 4

tral, excitement) was a between-subjects variable.2 As expected,
we found a significant Game  Music Condition interaction,
F(2, 79) 5 5.02, p < .01 (see Fig. 2). Tests of simple effects
confirmed that participants in the anger condition performed
significantly better in the confrontational game than did participants in the excitement condition, t(79) 5 2.47, p < .05, prep
5 .94. Subsequent analyses revealed that the impact of music
condition was limited to number of kills, which was significantly
higher in the anger condition than in the excitement condition,
t(79) 5 2.30, p < .05, prep 5 .92. The number of deaths did not
vary as a function of music condition, t(79)s < 1.10. Contrary to
performance in the confrontational game, performance in the
nonconfrontational game did not vary as a function of music
condition, t(79)s < 1.74.
Thus, participants chose to increase their anger before playing a confrontational game, and doing so improved their performance. The benefit to performance was anger-specific, as indexed by increased aggression.
DISCUSSION

Discussions of emotion regulation often assume that individuals
always want to increase pleasure and decrease pain (e.g., Larsen, 2000). This investigation supports an alternative view, according to which individuals want to experience emotions not
only for their short-term hedonic benefits, but also for their instrumental benefits (Bonanno, 2001; Parrott, 1993; Tamir, 2005;
Tamir et al., 2007). Specifically, we demonstrated that before
engaging in confrontational tasks, individuals are sometimes
motivated to engage in activities likely to increase their anger,
2
A preliminary analysis included game order as another between-subjects
variable. Because effects involving game order were not significant, Fs < 2, we
collapsed across this variable.

327

Hedonic and Instrumental Motives in Anger Regulation

despite the fact that such activities are less pleasant than alternative ones.
We further demonstrated that these emotional preferences
are, in fact, associated with instrumental benefits in confrontational contexts. Angry participants performed better than excited participants in a confrontational task. This enhanced
performance was specific to the confrontational task and to
outcomes associated with increased aggression (i.e., kills, but
not deaths). Together, these findings demonstrate that individuals can be motivated to experience even unpleasant emotions
in the short term, if such emotions offer instrumental benefits.
Our findings are consistent with a functional approach to
emotion regulation (Tamir, 2005; Tamir et al., 2007), according
to which emotional preferences depend on the goals (e.g., feel
good, perform well) individuals pursue in a given context. Our
findings make important contributions to the limited empirical
evidence regarding emotion-regulation motives. We demonstrated that individuals can be motivated to increase unpleasant
emotions, rather than decrease pleasant emotions (e.g., Erber et
al., 1996; Wood, Heimpel, & Michela, 2003) or maintain unpleasant emotions (e.g., Heimpel, Wood, Marshall, & Brown,
2002). We also showed that such preferences are linked to instrumental motives, rather than motives to neutralize feelings
(Erber et al., 1996) or experience trait-consistent states (e.g.,
Heimpel et al., 2002). In summary, we demonstrated that utility
can sometimes trump pleasure in motivating emotion regulation.
Unpleasant emotions are important predictors of mental
health. It is not surprising, therefore, that emotion-regulation
research has emphasized the importance of decreasing unpleasant emotions. Our findings, however, suggest that experiencing some degree of negative emotions in specific contexts
may be adaptive, if those emotions promote goal pursuits (Tamir
& Diener, in press).
Anger may be instrumental in some contexts (e.g., when
fighting over limited resources) and harmful in others (e.g., when
cooperating and sharing limited resources). In this investigation, we created artificial contexts in which anger could be more
or less instrumental. Given the uncertain ecological validity of
these contexts, future research should test our hypotheses in the
context of daily life (e.g., aggressive sports).
REFERENCES

Erber, R., Wegner, D.M., & Therriault, N. (1996). On being cool and
collected: Mood regulation in anticipation of social interaction.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 70, 757–766.
Freud, S. (1959). Inhibitions, symptoms, anxiety (J. Strachey, Ed., & A.
Strachey, Trans.). New York: Norton. (Original work published
1926)
Frijda, N.H. (1986). The emotions. New York: Cambridge University
Press.
Gross, J.J. (2002). Emotion regulation: Affective, cognitive, and social
consequences. Psychophysiology, 39, 281–291.
Heimpel, S., Wood, J.V., Marshall, M.A., & Brown, J.D. (2002). Do
people with low self-esteem really want to feel better? Self-esteem differences in motivation to repair negative moods. Journal
of Personality and Social Psychology, 82, 128–147.
Izard, C.E. (1990). The substrates and functions of emotion feelings:
William James and current emotion theory. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 16, 626–635.
Keltner, D., & Gross, J.J. (1999). Functional accounts of emotions.
Cognition & Emotion, 31, 467–480.
Larsen, R.J. (2000). Toward a science of mood regulation. Psychological Inquiry, 11, 129–141.
Mischel, W., Shoda, Y., & Rodriguez, M.L. (1989). Delay of gratification in children. Science, 244, 933–938.
Parrott, W.G. (1993). Beyond hedonism: Motives for inhibiting good
moods and for maintaining bad moods. In D.M. Wegner & J.W.
Pennebaker (Eds.), Handbook of mental control (pp. 278–305).
Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Parrott, W.G. (2001). Implications of dysfunctional emotions for understanding how emotions function. Review of General Psychology, 5, 180–186.
Robinson, M.D. (in press). Lives lived in milliseconds: Using cognitive
methods in personality research. In R.W. Robins, R.C. Fraley, &
R. Krueger (Eds.), Handbook of research methods in personality
psychology. New York: Guilford Press.
Tamir, M. (2005). Don’t worry, be happy? Neuroticism, trait-consistent
affect regulation, and performance. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 89, 449–461.
Tamir, M., Chiu, C.Y., & Gross, J.J. (2007). Business or pleasure?
Utilitarian versus hedonic consideration in emotion regulation.
Emotion, 7, 546–554.
Tamir, M., & Diener, E. (in press). Approach-avoidance goals and wellbeing: One size does not fit all. In A.J. Elliot (Ed.), Handbook of
approach and avoidance motivation. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Tiedens, L.Z. (2001). Anger and advancement versus sadness and
subjugation: The effect of negative emotion expressions on social
status conferral. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
80, 86–94.
Wood, J.V., Heimpel, S.A., & Michela, J.L. (2003). Savoring versus
dampening: Self-esteem differences in regulating positive affect.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 85, 566–580.

Averill, J. (1983). Studies on anger and aggression: Implications for
theories of emotion. American Psychologist, 38, 1145–1160.
Bonanno, G.A. (2001). Emotion self-regulation. In T.J. Mayne & G.A.
Bonanno (Eds.), Emotions: Current issues and future directions
(pp. 251–285). New York: Guilford Press.

(RECEIVED 6/30/07; REVISION ACCEPTED 10/1/07)

328

Volume 19—Number 4

