PS YC HOLOGICA L SC IENCE

Research Article

‘‘In-Group Love’’ and
‘‘Out-Group Hate’’ as Motives
for Individual Participation
in Intergroup Conﬂict
A New Game Paradigm
Nir Halevy, Gary Bornstein, and Lilach Sagiv
The Hebrew University of Jerusalem

ABSTRACT—What

motivates individual self-sacriﬁcial behavior in intergroup conﬂicts? Is it the altruistic desire to
help the in-group or the aggressive drive to hurt the outgroup? This article introduces a new game paradigm, the
intergroup prisoner’s dilemma–maximizing difference
(IPD-MD) game, designed speciﬁcally to distinguish between these two motives. The game involves two groups.
Each group member is given a monetary endowment and
can decide how much of it to contribute. Contribution can
be made to either of two pools, one that beneﬁts the ingroup at a personal cost and another that, in addition,
harms the out-group. An experiment demonstrated that
contributions in the IPD-MD game are made almost exclusively to the cooperative, within-group pool. Moreover,
preplay intragroup communication increases intragroup
cooperation, but not intergroup competition. These results
are compared with those observed in the intergroup
prisoner’s dilemma game, in which group members’ contributions are restricted to the competitive, between-group
pool.

How can one explain the pervasive human willingness ‘‘to ﬁght
and die for the ingroup . . . which makes lethal war possible’’
(Campbell, 1965, p. 293)? Narrow, self-interested rationality is
clearly not a good explanation. Although it is often rational for

Address correspondence to Nir Halevy, School of Business Administration, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Mount Scopus, Jerusalem 91905, Israel, e-mail: nyh@mscc.huji.ac.il.

Volume 19—Number 4

groups (e.g., nations, ethnic groups) to ﬁght, it is hardly ever
rational for individual group members to participate in largescale intergroup conﬂict. The effect one individual can possibly
have on the conﬂict’s outcome is negligible, whereas his or her
cost (e.g., in forgone opportunities, physical exertion, and risk of
injury or death) is rather high. Moreover, the beneﬁts associated
with winning the conﬂict (e.g., territory, political and economic
power, group pride) are by and large public goods that are
equally available to all the members of the winning group, regardless of whether they paid the cost of participation (Bornstein, 1992, 2003; Rapoport & Bornstein, 1987). This payoff
structure creates a clear disincentive for individual group members to participate in intergroup conﬂict.
The explanation for individual participation in intergroup
conﬂict must be rooted at the group level (Bowles, Choi, &
Hopfensitz, 2003; Fehr & Fischbacher, 2003). Groups that fail
to mobilize sufﬁcient participation will not survive the aggression of other groups (or be able to exploit their weaknesses), and
their members, conﬂict participants and nonparticipants alike,
will have to forgo the beneﬁts of victory or, worse yet, bear the
costs of defeat. This is indeed why groups employ powerful
solidarity mechanisms in time of conﬂict. Collective group goals
and common group identity are highlighted, norms of groupbased altruism are strengthened, punishment and rejection of
defectors are increased, and perceptions of the in-group and outgroup are manipulated (Brewer & Campbell, 1976; Campbell,
1965; Levine & Campbell, 1972; Sherif, 1966). Throughout
human history, groups with more effective means of instilling
self-sacriﬁce in their members have prevailed over groups with
less effective solidarity mechanisms, thereby propagating their

Copyright r 2008 Association for Psychological Science

405

In-Group Love and Out-Group Hate: A New Game Paradigm

altruistic (i.e., ethnocentric) norms and institutions (Bernhard,
Fischbacher, & Fehr, 2006; Boyd, Gintis, Bowles, & Richerson,
2003).

MODELING INTERGROUP CONFLICT

Intergroup conﬂicts cannot be understood without taking into
consideration the internal tension between group welfare and
individual welfare. Because the relative success of the two
groups in overcoming this intragroup conﬂict determines the
outcome of the intergroup competition, the intragroup and intergroup levels of conﬂict must be considered simultaneously. A
basic model of this two-level structure is the intergroup prisoner’s
dilemma (IPD) game (Bornstein, 1992, 2003; Bornstein & BenYossef, 1994).
In this section, we illustrate the IPD game using a speciﬁc set
of parameters (see Bornstein, 2003, for a general deﬁnition). The
game is played by two groups, with 3 members in each group.
Each player receives an endowment of 10 tokens and can contribute any number of these tokens to the group’s pool. For each
token contributed by a member of the in-group, each of its
members, including the contributor, gains 1 money unit (MU)
and each member of the out-group loses 1 MU. For each token
kept, the player is paid 2 MU. This simple game captures the key
strategic properties of a large-scale intergroup conﬂict, as described in the introduction. Because the individual’s return from
contributing a token is 1 MU, but his or her cost is 2 MU, the
dominant individual strategy—the strategy that yields the
highest personal payoffs regardless of what all the other in-group
and out-group members do—is to contribute nothing (i.e., defect). However, because contributing a token generates a total of
3 MU for the group while costing only 2 MU, the dominant group
strategy—the strategy that yields the highest payoffs for each
group regardless of what the other group does—is for all group
members to contribute all their tokens.
These two properties deﬁne the intragroup payoff structure in
the IPD game as an n-person (3-person in our example) prisoner’s dilemma (PD) game (Dawes, 1980). This internal dilemma, however, is embedded in a PD game between the two groups.
If both groups execute their dominant strategies in this intergroup game, both end up with relatively poor outcomes. From the
collective point of view of both groups and all players, each
token contributed is a net waste of 2 MU, because the 2 MU that
could be earned by keeping the token is traded off for an ingroup gain that is exactly offset by the out-group’s loss. The
collectively optimal strategy—the strategy that maximizes the
payoff of all players in both groups—is for all players to withhold
contribution (i.e., defect).
The relations among individual, group, and collective interests in intergroup conﬂicts as modeled by the IPD game are
clearly illustrated by Dawes’s (1980) battle example. Dawes
observed that

406

soldiers who ﬁght in a large battle can reasonably conclude that no
matter what their comrades do they personally are better off taking
no chances; yet if no one takes chances, the result will be a rout and
slaughter worse for all the soldiers than is taking chances. (p. 170)

From the perspective of one side, the battle situation is a social
dilemma with defection being rational for the individual but
harmful to the group. However, from a broader perspective that
includes all the soldiers on both sides, defection is both individually rational and collectively efﬁcient. All soldiers in the
battle will be better off if they all act selﬁshly and take no
chances, as then no one will be hurt.
This additional level of superordinate or collective interest
necessarily affects the motivational meaning of individual behavior. Whereas in a single-group dilemma, contributing is
unmistakably altruistic and defection is plainly selﬁsh, in intergroup conﬂicts as modeled by the IPD game, the motivation
underlying individual behavior is inherently indistinct. Contributing can be motivated by an altruistic desire to help the ingroup, but it can also result from an aggressive motivation to hurt
the out-group (or the competitive motivation to increase the ingroup’s advantage over the out-group). The motivation underlying defection is also ambiguous. Refusing to take part in war
can reﬂect a true altruistic concern for the collective welfare (of
all players in both groups), but because defection is also consistent with the individual’s self-interest, a paciﬁst is always
suspected of being a free rider.
To disentangle these motivational ambiguities, we introduce a
new paradigm, called the intergroup prisoner’s dilemma–maximizing difference (IPD-MD) game. Like the IPD game, the IPDMD game involves a competition between two 3-member groups.
Each group member receives an endowment of 10 tokens, each
worth 2 MU, and can decide how many of these tokens to contribute. Unlike in the IPD game, however, contributions can be
made to two different pools. Contributing a token to the withingroup pool (pool W) increases the payoff for each in-group
member, including the contributor, by 1 MU, without affecting
the out-group. Contributing a token to the between-group pool
(pool B) increases the payoff for each in-group member, including the contributor, by 1 MU, and at the same time decreases
the payoff for each out-group member by 1 MU.
The choice between pools Wand B is what reveals the speciﬁc
motivation underlying each individual’s behavior. Contributing
to pool W clearly indicates a cooperative motivation to beneﬁt
the in-group without hurting the out-group. Contributing to pool
B, in contrast, indicates an aggressive motivation to hurt the outgroup, or a competitive motivation to increase the in-group’s
advantage over the out-group.1 As in the IPD game, a narrowly

1
If players are concerned only with their in-group’s welfare, and completely
disregard that of the out-group, they should divide their contribution randomly
between pools W and B. If, however, players intentionally restrict their contributions to pool W, they must be attaching some positive value to the outgroup’s welfare, rather than being merely indifferent to it.

Volume 19—Number 4

Nir Halevy, Gary Bornstein, and Lilach Sagiv

TABLE 1
Payoffs in the Intergroup Prisoner’s Dilemma–Maximizing
Difference (IPD-MD) Game

In-group

Keep
endowment

Out-group
Contribute
to pool W

Contribute
to pool B

Keep endowment

20, 20

20, 30

10, 30

Contribute to pool W

30, 20

30, 30

0, 30

30, 0

0, 0

Contribute to pool B

30,

10

Note. This table presents payoffs for games in which all members of each
group make the same decision: to keep all their tokens, contribute all their
tokens to pool W, or contribute all their tokens to pool B. In each cell, the left
ﬁgure is the payoff to each in-group player in monetary units, and the right
ﬁgure is the payoff to each out-group player in monetary units. When the
option of contributing to pool W is eliminated, the IPD-MD game is transformed into the intergroup prisoner’s dilemma game (depicted by the four
corner cells, in gray). When the option of contributing to pool B is removed,
the game becomes two independent 3-person prisoner’s dilemma games played
side by side (depicted by the four cells inside the thick outline box). If the
players are compelled to contribute their entire endowment, the IPD-MD
game is reduced to a maximizing difference or ‘‘spite’’ game between the two
groups (depicted by the four cells in the triple outline box). In experimental
contexts, a ﬁxed sum is added to payoffs to ensure that they are positive.

rational player should contribute nothing. However, withholding
contribution (i.e., defection) in this new game is plainly selﬁsh
and can no longer be confused with an altruistic concern for the
collective welfare.
Table 1 illustrates the individual payoffs in the IPD-MD game.
For simplicity, it speciﬁes only the payoffs for the corner cells, in
which all the members of a group contribute their entire endowment to pool W, contribute it all to pool B, or keep all 10
tokens. When the option of contributing to pool W is eliminated,
the IPD-MD game is transformed into the IPD game (depicted by
the four corner cells, in gray). When the option of contributing to
pool B is removed, the game becomes two independent 3-person
PD games played side by side (depicted by the four cells inside
the thick outline box; Bornstein & Ben-Yossef, 1994). The IPDMD game, in which both these options are available, essentially
allows group members to decide whether they wish to play the
IPD or the PD game (or, more accurately, how they want to divide
their efforts between the two games). If the players are compelled to contribute their entire endowment and they can decide
only how to divide their 10 tokens between pools W and B, the
internal free-riding problem is eliminated, and the IPD-MD
game is reduced to a maximizing difference (MD) or ‘‘spite’’
game (Kelley & Thibaut, 1978) between the two groups (depicted by the four cells in the triple outline box).
We maintain that in addition to being useful for discerning
between ‘‘in-group love’’ and ‘‘out-group hate’’ as reasons for
individual participation (and between selﬁshness and universalism as reasons for defection), the IPD-MD game is valuable as
a simpliﬁed, abstract model of common real-world intergroup
situations. Whereas the IPD game models two groups that are
already ﬁghting over absolute and relative outcomes, the IPD-

Volume 19—Number 4

MD game describes a more benign situation in which the
members of each group can choose whether to cooperate in
solving their internal dilemmas or compete with the other group
for relative payoffs (Jervis, 1978; Snidal, 1986). Being able to
choose between military service and equivalent civic or community service is a good example of such a situation.
THE EXPERIMENT: GROUP AND INDIVIDUAL
BEHAVIOR IN THE IPD AND IPD-MD GAMES

We conducted a laboratory experiment that compared behavior
in the IPD and IPD-MD games. In half the experimental sessions, the participants made their decisions without communicating with the other in-group members. In the other half, group
members met for a short discussion before making their decisions. Allowing group members to communicate (even when, as
in the present experiment, communication is nonbinding and
has no payoff consequences) has been shown to increase cooperation in one-shot social dilemmas (see Weber, Kopelman, &
Messick, 2004, for a review), including the IPD game (Bornstein, 1992). Communication increases cooperation by enhancing group identity and commitment (e.g., Kerr & KaufmanGilliland, 1994), eliciting relevant social norms (Bicchieri,
2002), and manipulating perceptions of the in-group and the
out-group (Bornstein, 1992). Studying the IPD and IPD-MD
games played without and with communication enabled us to
determine the extent to which individual decisions are motivated by in-group love or out-group hate, and whether the intragroup processes that take place during discussion affect the
relative signiﬁcance of these two motives.
Method
Participants
Two hundred forty male students participated (mean age 5 24
years, SD 5 3).2 They were recruited using ads promising a
monetary reward for participation in a group decision-making
experiment.
Design and Procedure
Participants arrived at the laboratory in cohorts of 6 and were
randomly assigned to one of the four conditions (IPD or IPD-MD
with or without intragroup communication). The participants in
each cohort were randomly divided into two 3-person groups.
Each participant was escorted into a private room, where he was
given instructions concerning the rules and payoffs of the relevant game. The instructions were phrased in neutral language
(e.g., the pools were labeled ‘‘A’’ and ‘‘B,’’ with no reference to
‘‘cooperation’’ or ‘‘competition’’) and explained how each play2
We also examined the behavior of all-female groups in the IPD-MD game
(played with intragroup communication) and found no differences between allfemale and all-male groups: Women kept similar proportions of the initial endowment (26%) and contributed similar proportions of their endowment to the
within-group pool (72.3%) and the between-group pool (1.3%).

407

In-Group Love and Out-Group Hate: A New Game Paradigm

er’s own decision and the decisions of the other players would
affect the payoffs. Participants subsequently answered a short
quiz that tested their understanding of the game’s rules.
Each participant received an endowment of 10 tokens and had
to indicate on a ‘‘decision form’’ how many tokens he was
keeping, how many he was contributing to pool W (the withingroup pool in the IPD-MD game), and how many he was contributing to pool B (the between-group pool in the IPD-MD game
and the only pool in the IPD game). Each token that was contributed to either pool Wor pool B paid 1 NIS (new Israeli shekel)
to each in-group member, including the contributor. Each token
that was contributed to pool B also subtracted 1 NIS from the
payoff to each out-group member. For each token a player kept,
he was paid 2 NIS. In addition, each player was paid a ﬂat bonus
of 30 NIS to ensure that payoffs would be positive. Thus, participants could earn between 10 NIS and 70 NIS (approximately
$2.50 to $17.50), depending on the outcome of the game.
Participants in the no-communication condition made their
decisions without communicating with the other in-group members. Participants in the communication condition met with the
other members of their team for 5 min of free discussion and then
returned to their rooms to make their decisions in private. Participants were explicitly assured that their decisions would remain conﬁdential.
After submitting their decisions, but before learning the outcomes of the game, participants responded to a postexperimental questionnaire assessing their expectations regarding the
behavior of in-group and out-group members (i.e., how many
chips, on average, in-group and out-group members had contributed to each of the pools).

Results
Following discussion, the decisions of group members were no
longer independent. Therefore, all the analyses reported here
(including, for the sake of comparison, those pertaining to the
no-communication condition) were done at the group level
(twenty 3-person groups in each of the four experimental conditions).
The type of game had a signiﬁcant effect on the overall contribution rate—the proportion of tokens that were contributed to
either pool W or pool B. Across the two communication conditions, the participants contributed 63% of their endowment in
the IPD-MD game, as compared with 51% in the IPD game, F(1,
76) 5 3.96, p 5 .050. The main effect of communication was
also signiﬁcant, F(1, 76) 5 21.47, p 5 .000. Across the two
games, within-group communication increased the overall
contribution rate from 44% to 70%. Game type and communication did not have an interactive effect on the overall contribution rate, F(1, 76) 5 1.41, p 5 .239. Figure 1 presents the
mean contribution rates in the four conditions.
The most important ﬁnding concerns how contributions were
divided between pools Wand B in the IPD-MD game. As Figure

408

1 shows, contributions were made almost exclusively to the
cooperative, within-group pool. In the no-communication condition, participants contributed an average of 47% of their endowment to pool W and less than 6% to pool B.3 Following
within-group communication, contributions to pool W increased
to 68%, t(29) 5 2.756, p 5 .010, whereas contributions to pool
B remained low, at 4%.
Looking more closely at the behavior of the individual participants revealed the following pattern. In the IPD game, about
7% of the participants in the no-communication condition
contributed all 10 tokens to pool B, and 33% contributed
nothing. Following group discussion, the distribution changed
dramatically; 57% of the individuals contributed everything,
and 18% contributed nothing. In the IPD-MD game, about 77%
of participants in the no-communication condition contributed
nothing to pool B, and this rate increased to 83% following
discussion. About 30% of participants in the no-communication
condition contributed everything to pool W, and this rate increased to 58% following group discussion.
The different patterns of behavior in the two games resulted in
different levels of collective efﬁciency (i.e., the joint earnings of
all the players in both groups as a percentage of the maximum
possible earnings). In general, efﬁciency was higher in the IPDMD than in the IPD game, F(1, 36) 5 51.410, p 5 .000. As noted
earlier, in both games, group communication enhanced individual contributions. However, in the IPD-MD game, communication increased contributions to the cooperative, withingroup pool, thus enhancing efﬁciency, whereas in the IPD game,
communication raised contributions to the competitive, between-group pool, thereby diminishing collective efﬁciency.
This interaction between game type and communication was
statistically signiﬁcant, F(1, 36) 5 18.791, p 5 .000. Speciﬁcally, in the IPD-MD game, the 6 players could have earned a
total of 180 NIS if they all had contributed their entire endowment to pool W. They actually earned about 78% of this amount
in the no-communication condition and almost 87% in the
communication condition. In the IPD game, the 6 players could
have earned a total of 120 NIS if they had all kept their entire
endowment. The average efﬁciency rate was 65% in the nocommunication condition, and only 32% in the communication
condition.

Discussion
A central issue in the psychological literature on intergroup
relations is whether individual behavior in intergroup conﬂict is
motivated by altruism toward the in-group, aggression toward
the out-group, or a combination of both (De Figuerdo & Elkins,
2003). As pointed out by Brewer (1999), many researchers (e.g.,
Sherif, 1966; Tajfel & Turner, 1986) seem to accept that ‘‘in3
The contribution rate to pool B in the IPD-MD game was signiﬁcantly lower
than the contribution rate to pool B (the only pool) in the IPD game, F(1, 76) 5
109.74, p 5 .000.

Volume 19—Number 4

Nir Halevy, Gary Bornstein, and Lilach Sagiv

80
70

Percentage

60
50
40
30
20
10
0
IPD-MD With
Communication

IPD-MD Without
Communication

IPD With
Communication

IPD Without
Communication

Kept
Contributed to the Within-Group Pool
Contributed to the Between-Group Pool
Fig. 1. Percentage of the initial endowment kept and contributed to the two pools, as a function of the game and
whether or not the in-group discussed the game before making their decisions. IPD 5 intergroup prisoner’s dilemma
game; IPD-MD 5 intergroup prisoner’s dilemma–maximizing difference game.

group love and outgroup hate are reciprocally related’’ (p. 430).
Other researchers, including Allport (1954) and Brewer (1999)
herself, argue that in-group altruism does not necessarily imply
out-group hostility.
This issue is equally pertinent to the literature on international relations, in which the group, rather than the individual
group member, is the focus of investigation. The question in that
ﬁeld is whether groups (e.g., states, ethnic groups) strive to
maximize absolute or relative gains (Jervis, 1978; Powell, 1991;
Rousseau, 2002; Snidal, 1991). Whereas liberal institutionalists
assume that groups focus on their absolute gains and have little
interest in the gains of other groups, structural realists claim that
groups are concerned mainly with their gains in comparison with
those of other groups.
To distinguish between in-group love and out-group hate, or
between the maximization of absolute and relative gains, as motives for individual and group behavior in intergroup conﬂict, we
introduced and studied the IPD-MD game. In this game, players
could make a costly contribution to either of two pools, one that
beneﬁted the in-group and another that, in addition, harmed the
out-group. We found that contributions were made almost exclusively to the cooperative, within-group pool. Moreover, communication within the groups increased intragroup cooperation,
but not intergroup competition. Clearly, participants in the IPDMD game preferred to maximize their group’s absolute payoffs,
rather than compete for relative payoffs, even though they could
disadvantage the out-group at no additional cost.
This ﬁnding supports Campbell’s (1965) impression that ‘‘the
altruistic willingness for self-sacriﬁcial death in group causes

Volume 19—Number 4

may be more signiﬁcant than the covetous tendency for hostility
toward outgroup members’’ (p. 293). It is also in line with minimal-group research, which has found that bias in favor of the ingroup is more pronounced in the positive domain (attributing
positive traits, allocating rewards) than in the negative domain
(attributing negative traits, allocating punishments; e.g., Amiot
& Bouhris, 2003; Brewer, 1999; Buhl, 1999; Hewstone, Rubin,
& Willis, 2002; Mummendey & Otten, 1998).4
The peaceful group coexistence observed in the IPD-MD
game was utterly shattered in the IPD game, in which maximizing the in-group’s gain was necessarily at the expense of the
out-group (and the broader society). Under these circumstances,
group members did not hesitate to compete. One obvious explanation for this behavior is that the in-group members placed
more weight on the gains their contribution produced for the ingroup than on the losses it inﬂicted on the out-group. Another
possibility is that in-group members made their contributions
because they expected the out-group members to contribute and
wanted to defend themselves against the possibility of falling
behind. Research on intergroup interaction (e.g., Diehl, 1989)
suggests that the fear of falling behind is more of a motivation
4
There is, however, an important methodological difference between the
minimal-group research and the IPD-MD game paradigm. In the minimal-group
paradigm, in-group favoritism and out-group derogation are investigated separately by manipulating the valence (positive/negative) of the evaluated traits
and the behavioral mode (allocation/removal) of the allocated resources (Amiot
& Bouhris, 2003; Mummendey & Otten, 1998). In the IPD-MD game, the
relative strength of the two motives is assessed within subjects by having them
make a single decision that affects their own welfare, the welfare of their ingroup, and, if they so choose, the welfare of the out-group.

409

In-Group Love and Out-Group Hate: A New Game Paradigm

than the aspiration to get ahead. This explanation is consistent
with the results of our postexperimental questionnaire, which
indicated that participants in the IPD game expected the outgroup members to behave more competitively than did participants in the IPD-MD game, F(1, 76) 5 171.384, p 5 .000.
IMPLICATIONS FOR CONFLICT RESOLUTION

Groups are generally considered competitive and aggressive—
more so than individuals (Meier & Hinsz, 2004; Rabbie, 1998).
This view of groups has been corroborated by a series of experiments comparing strategic interaction between two groups
with interaction between two individuals (e.g., Schopler & Insko, 1992; Wildschut, Pinter, Vevea, Insko, & Schopler, 2003).
The typical ﬁnding in these experiments was that groups interact
more competitively than individuals, an effect that has been
labeled the individual-group discontinuity effect.
The present study found that groups are not competitive or
aggressive per se. In fact, when possible, group members prefer
to cooperate so as to maximize their absolute group gains, rather
than to compete against the out-group for relative gains (and
they assume that out-group members have similar preferences).
However, when maximizing in-group gain necessitates hurting
the out-group, in-group members do not hesitate to compete (and
they assume that out-group members would be similarly competitive). Although these results may appear at odds with the
discontinuity hypothesis, this is not necessarily the case. The
discontinuity research investigated intergroup and interindividual interactions in the 2-person PD game. In this game, as in
the IPD game we used, competition can be motivated by either
absolute- or relative-gain considerations. Groups may very well
appear more competitive than individuals simply because they
are more rational players with better insight into the strategic
structure of the game than individuals (Bornstein, 2003; Lodewijkx, Rabbie, & Visser, 2006; Rabbie, 1998).
Our results have important implications for conﬂict resolution. Above all, the high level of intragroup cooperation and the
low level of intergroup competition observed in the IPD-MD
game suggest that intergroup conﬂicts can be resolved by
channeling group members’ altruism toward internal group
causes. Whereas in the IPD game, ‘‘peace’’ is achieved only if all
members of both groups defect, in the IPD-MD game, groups can
avoid war while maintaining their ability to mobilize collective
action. In view of the difﬁculties that individual rationality poses
for mobilization of collective action in the ﬁrst place, losing
this ability is highly problematic from a group’s point of view
(Campbell, 1972). Clearly, ‘‘more cooperative groups are less
subject to extinction because they are more effective in warfare,
more successful in co-insuring, [and] more adept at managing
commons resources’’ (Boyd et. al., 2003, p. 3531).
Sherif (1966) believed that the existence of superordinate
goals is necessary to increase cooperation and reduce conﬂict
between groups. As pointed out by Brewer (1999), however, a

410

common challenge or threat is unlikely to increase cooperation
between highly differentiated social groups. People cooperate if
they expect others to cooperate as well (Fehr & Fischbacher,
2003), and although they expect reciprocation from in-group
members, they do not expect it from members of out-groups (e.g.,
Yamagishi & Kiyonari, 2000). Cooperative social norms are
group-level phenomena that emerge through interactions within
groups and apply to in-group members (Bernhard et al., 2006).
Thus, the solution to intergroup conﬂict put forward by the IPDMD game may be more feasible than that suggested by Sherif.
The collectively optimal solution, the one maximizing joint
welfare in the IPD-MD game, calls for cooperation among the
members of the same group and, at least in this respect, is
‘‘essentially non-problematic’’ (Brewer, 1999, p. 436).
The present study examined the IPD-MD game played only
once between small, randomly composed laboratory groups. So
that our results will be more pertinent to real-world group conﬂicts, this preliminary investigation should eventually be expanded to include repeated interactions between larger groups
with more meaningful group identities and boundaries.
Acknowledgments—We acknowledge the support of the Israel
Science Foundation to Gary Bornstein (Grant 535/05), the Israel
Foundation Trustees and the Minerva Center for Human Rights
at the Hebrew University to Nir Halevy, and the Recanati
Foundation of the Hebrew University School of Business Administration to Lilach Sagiv.
REFERENCES
Allport, G.W. (1954). The nature of prejudice. New York: AddisonWesley.
Amiot, C.E., & Bourhis, R.Y. (2003). Discrimination and the positivenegative asymmetry effect: Ideological and normative processes.
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 29, 597–608.
Bernhard, H., Fischbacher, U., & Fehr, E. (2006). Parochial altruism
in humans. Nature, 442, 912–915.
Bicchieri, C. (2002). Covenants without swords. Rationality and Society, 14, 192–228.
Bornstein, G. (1992). The free rider problem in intergroup conﬂicts
over step-level and continuous public goods. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 62, 597–606.
Bornstein, G. (2003). Intergroup conﬂict: Individual, group and collective interests. Personality and Social Psychology Review, 7,
129–145.
Bornstein, G., & Ben-Yossef, M. (1994). Cooperation in intergroup and
single-group social dilemmas. Journal of Experimental Social
Psychology, 30, 52–67.
Bowles, S., Choi, J.K., & Hopfensitz, A. (2003). The co-evolution of
individual behaviors and social institutions. Journal of Theoretical Biology, 223, 135–147.
Boyd, R., Gintis, H., Bowles, S., & Richerson, P.J. (2003). The evolution of altruistic punishment. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, USA, 100, 3531–3535.
Brewer, M.B. (1999). The psychology of prejudice: Ingroup love or
outgroup hate? Journal of Social Issues, 55, 429–444.

Volume 19—Number 4

Nir Halevy, Gary Bornstein, and Lilach Sagiv

Brewer, M.B., & Campbell, D.T. (1976). Ethnocentrism and intergroup
attitudes: East African evidence. Beverly Hills, CA: Sage.
Buhl, T. (1999). Positive-negative asymmetry in social discrimination:
Meta-analytical evidence. Group Processes and Intergroup Relations, 2, 51–58.
Campbell, D.T. (1965). Ethnocentric and other altruistic motives. In D.
Levine (Ed.), Nebraska Symposium on Motivation (Vol. 13, pp.
283–311). Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press.
Campbell, D.T. (1972). On the genetics of altruism and the counterhedonic components in human culture. Journal of Social Issues, 3,
21–37.
Dawes, R.M. (1980). Social dilemmas. Annual Review of Psychology,
31, 169–193.
De Figuerdo, R.J.P., Jr., & Elkins, Z. (2003). Are patriots bigots? An
inquiry into the vices of ingroup pride. American Journal of Political Science, 47, 171–188.
Diehl, M. (1989). Justice and discrimination between minimal groups:
The limits of equity. British Journal of Social Psychology, 28,
227–238.
Fehr, E., & Fischbacher, U. (2003). The nature of human altruism.
Nature, 425, 785–791.
Hewstone, M., Rubin, M., & Willis, H. (2002). Intergroup bias. Annual
Review of Psychology, 53, 575–604.
Jervis, R. (1978). Cooperation under the security dilemma. World
Politics, 30, 167–186.
Kelley, H.H., & Thibaut, J.W. (1978). Interpersonal relations: A theory
of interdependence. New York: Wiley.
Kerr, N.L., & Kaufman-Gilliland, C.M. (1994). Communication, commitment, and cooperation in social dilemmas. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 66, 513–529.
Levine, R.A., & Campbell, D.T. (1972). Ethnocentrism: Theories of
conﬂict, ethnic attitudes and group behavior. New York: Wiley.
Lodewijkx, H.F.M., Rabbie, J.M., & Visser, L. (2006). ‘‘Better to be
safe than sorry’’: Extinguishing the individual-group discontinuity effect in competition by cautious reciprocation. In W.
Stroebe & M. Hewstone (Eds.), European review of social psychology (Vol. 17, pp. 185–232). Chichester, England: Wiley.
Meier, B.P., & Hinsz, V.B. (2004). A comparison of human aggression
committed by groups and individuals: An interindividual-intergroup discontinuity. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology,
40, 551–559.
Mummendey, A., & Otten, S. (1998). Positive-negative asymmetry in
social discrimination. In M. Hewstone & W. Stroebe (Eds.), Eu-

Volume 19—Number 4

ropean review of social psychology (Vol. 9, pp. 107–143). London:
Wiley.
Powell, R. (1991). Absolute and relative gains in international relations theory. American Political Science Review, 85, 1303–1320.
Rabbie, J.M. (1998). Is there a discontinuity or a reciprocity effect in
cooperation and competition between groups? European Journal
of Social Psychology, 28, 483–507.
Rapoport, A., & Bornstein, G. (1987). Intergroup competition for the
provision of binary public-goods. Psychological Review, 94, 291–
299.
Rousseau, D.L. (2002). Motivations for choice: The salience of relative
gains in international politics. Journal of Conﬂict Resolution, 46,
394–426.
Schopler, J., & Insko, C.A. (1992). The discontinuity effect in interpersonal and intergroup relations: Generality and mediation. In
W. Stroebe & M. Hewstone (Eds.), European review of social
psychology (Vol. 3, pp. 121–151). Chichester, England: Wiley.
Sherif, M. (1966). In common predicament: Social psychology of intergroup conﬂict and cooperation. Boston: Houghton-Mifﬂin.
Snidal, D. (1986). The game theory of international politics. In K. Oye
(Ed.), Cooperation under anarchy (pp. 25–57). Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press.
Snidal, D. (1991). International cooperation among relative gains maximizers. International Studies Quarterly, 35, 387–402.
Tajfel, H., & Turner, J. (1986). The social identity theory of intergroup
behavior. In S. Worchel & W.G. Austin (Eds.), Psychology of
intergroup relations (pp. 7–24). Chicago: Nelson-Hall.
Weber, J.M., Kopelman, S., & Messick, D.M. (2004). A conceptual review
of decision making in social dilemmas: Applying a logic of appropriateness. Personality and Social Psychology Review, 8, 281–
304.
Wildschut, T., Pinter, B., Vevea, J.L., Insko, C.A., & Schopler, J.
(2003). Beyond the group mind: A quantitative review of the interindividual-intergroup discontinuity effect. Psychological Bulletin, 129, 698–722.
Yamagishi, T., & Kiyonari, T. (2000). The group as a container of
generalized reciprocity. Social Psychology Quarterly, 63, 112–
132.

(RECEIVED 7/4/07; REVISION ACCEPTED 10/15/07)

411

