P SY CH OL OG I C AL S CIE N CE

Research Report

A Word-Order Constraint on
Phonological Activation
Niels Janssen,1,2 F.-Xavier Alario,1 and Alfonso Caramazza2,3
1

CNRS and Universite´ de Provence; 2Harvard University; and 3Centre for Mind/Brain Sciences, Trento University

ABSTRACT—Word-order rules impose major constraints on

linguistic behavior. For example, adjectives appear before
nouns in English, and after nouns in French. This means
that constraints on word order must be language-specific
properties upheld on-line by the language system. Despite
the importance of these rules, little is known about how
they operate. We report an influence of word order on the
activation of phonological representations. Participants
were presented with colored objects and asked to name
either the colors or the objects; the phonological similarity
between the object and color names was manipulated.
French speakers showed a phonological congruency effect
in color naming, but not in object naming. English participants yielded the opposite pattern: a phonological effect in object naming, but not in color naming. Differences
in the typical order of nouns and adjectives in French and
English provide a plausible account for this cross-linguistic
contrast. More generally, these results provide direct evidence for the operation of word-order constraints during
language production.
Many languages impose constraints on the order in which words
from various grammatical classes appear in a sentence. Compare, for example, English and French noun phrases, such as
blue car versus voiture bleue. As these phrases illustrate, adjectives appear before nouns in English, but typically appear
after nouns in French. This example suggests that constraints on
word order are language-specific properties upheld on-line by
the language system. Within the field of language production,
relatively little research has been dedicated to understanding
word-order constraints (some exceptions are Bates, Friederici,
Wulfeck, & Juarez, 1988; Bock, 1987; Cleland & Pickering,
2003; Dell & Reich, 1981; Garrett, 1976; Hartsuiker & Wes-

Address correspondence to Niels Janssen, Laboratoire de Psychologie Cognitive, CNRS and Université de Provence, 3, place Victor
Hugo – Case 66, 13331 Marseille Cedex 3, France, e-mail: janssen@
up.univ-mrs.fr.

216

tenberg, 2000; Janssen, 2005). In this article, we report a study
in which we investigated how word order influences the activation of phonological representations.
The prevalent view in language-production models is that
phonological representations are activated by means of a cascading flow of activation from the lexical level: As soon as a
lexical representation is activated, its corresponding phonological representations are activated (see Goldrick, 2006, for a review; but see Levelt, Roelofs, & Meyer, 1999). The phonological
congruency effect demonstrated by Morsella and Miozzo (2002)
was interpreted as supporting this hypothesis. These authors
observed that naming a target picture (e.g., dog) in the context
of a distracting, not-named picture is faster if the distractor’s
name (e.g., doll) is phonologically congruent with the target’s
name than if it is incongruent (e.g., bell). These results follow
from the assumption that the activation of the context picture’s
name cascades to its phonological representations. When the
context and target phonological representations are congruent,
those representations are activated and selected more quickly
(Goldrick, 2006, and references therein; see also Meyer &
Damian, 2007; Morgan & Meyer, 2005; but see Bloem & La Heij,
2003).
This unregulated-cascading hypothesis states that any active
word representation will activate its phonological representations. This simple view is problematic for multiword production,
however, because many target words that will ultimately be
produced are active concurrently. Under such circumstances, it
is not obvious how a particular target word’s phonological representations can be distinguished from the phonological representations activated by the other target words. One solution is to
assume that activation of phonological representations is constrained by the linear relationships among lexical items. For
example, if word order constrains phonological activation,
then at any point in time, phonological representations of
earlier words receive stronger activation than those of later
words (e.g., Dell, 1986). Evidence for this hypothesis is scarce.
Some results consistent with it were reported in studies using
the picture-word interference paradigm to investigate the scope
of phonological encoding during multiword production. For

Copyright r 2008 Association for Psychological Science

Volume 19—Number 3

Niels Janssen, F.-Xavier Alario, and Alfonso Caramazza

example, Jescheniak, Schriefers, and Hantsch (2003) observed
that phonological priming effects were modulated by word position. This was taken as evidence for graded phonological activation of the words composing the target utterance (see also
Costa & Caramazza, 2002; Damian & Dumay, 2007; Dell,
Burger, & Svec, 1997; Meyer, 1996). Consider in this context the
two noun-phrase examples given earlier. If word order constrains phonological activation, then the canonical word order
will initially lead to greater activation of adjective than noun
phonology in English, and the opposite pattern in French.
Navarrete and Costa (2006) extended the evidence in support
of a cascading flow of activation to the situation in which an
adjective and a noun are active concurrently. In their study,
Spanish participants named the color of colored objects faster
when the phonological onsets of the color and object names were
congruent (e.g., vela verde, ‘‘green candle’’) than when they were
incongruent (e.g., vela azul, ‘‘blue candle’’). In Spanish, nouns
typically appear before adjectives. The hypothesis that word
order modulates phonological activation explains this phonological congruency effect in adjective naming by assuming early
activation of the noun. This hypothesis further predicts that
naming of object nouns in languages with noun-adjective word
order, such as Spanish, should not be influenced by the phonology of color adjectives. This is because the activation of noun
phonology should precede the activation of adjective phonology.
We tested this prediction in Experiment 1, in which French
speakers named either the color of an object or the object itself.
In French, as in Spanish, object nouns typically appear before
color adjectives. The word-order-modulation hypothesis predicts a phonological facilitation effect for adjectives, but not for
nouns. Finding similar phonological effects for nouns and adjectives would be evidence against the hypothesis.
EXPERIMENT 1: COLOR AND OBJECT NAMING IN
FRENCH

Method
Participants
Thirty-two native speakers of French participated in this experiment. Half of them performed the color-naming task, and
half the object-naming task. All were students at the Université
de Provence, France. They received course credit for participation.
Materials and Design
Four colors (red, green, blue, and orange) were used. For each
color, we selected seven pictures (Alario & Ferrand, 1999) that
shared at least the onset consonant with the color name. These
color-object pairings were used for the congruent condition. The
incongruent condition was created by re-pairing all pictures
having a given onset with a particular color whose name had a
different onset (e.g., all ‘‘r’’ pictures were re-paired with the
same nonred color), so that picture names and color names did

Volume 19—Number 3

not overlap in phonology (see Table 1 for a list of the object
names). Thus, there were 56 experimental items. An additional
set of 56 filler items was created by pairing a set of 28 pictures
with two different color names that did not overlap with the
object names in phonology. Thus, overall, there were 28 congruent and 84 incongruent trials. Finally, eight of the filler items
used in the experiment proper were also used during training.
The original pictures were black line drawings on a white
background; they were transformed into colored pictures by
coloring the outline with one of the four designated colors.
Items were pseudorandomly ordered within four blocks of
trials. Each block consisted of an equal number of experimental
TABLE 1
Names of the Stimulus Objects
Experiment 1
râteau (‘‘rake’’)
règle (‘‘ruler’’)
renard (‘‘fox’’)
requin (‘‘shark’’)
robe (‘‘dress’’)
robinet (‘‘sink’’)
roue (‘‘wheel’’)
ballon (‘‘balloon’’)
banc (‘‘bench’’)
barbecue (‘‘barbecue’’)
bougie (‘‘candle’’)
bouteille (‘‘bottle’’)
bouton (‘‘button’’)
bureau (‘‘desk’’)
vache (‘‘cow’’)
valise (‘‘suitcase’’)
vase (‘‘vase’’)
verre (‘‘glass’’)
violon (‘‘violin’’)
vis (‘‘screw’’)
voiture (‘‘car’’)
œil (‘‘eye’’)
oignon (‘‘onion’’)
oiseau (‘‘bird’’)
orange (‘‘orange’’)
oreille (‘‘ear’’)
orteil (‘‘toe’’)
ours (‘‘bear’’)

Experiment 2
rabbit
rake
racket
rocket
ruler
rat
rope
record
ring
road
broom
bow
barn
barrel
bike
bottle
bear
bed
ball
book
glove
giraffe
guitar
grave
globe
ghost
glasses
goat
gun
glass
paddle
pitcher
parrot
peanut
plug
pear
pen
pants
pig
pipe

217

Word-Order Constraints

and filler trials, with each picture appearing once, and the
different colors appearing an equal number of times. The same
color never appeared on consecutive trials, and neither did
pictures with a semantic or phonological relationship. There
were never more than three items from the same condition in a
row. The order of the blocks was counterbalanced following a
Latin-square design.

Color Naming
Before analysis, 3.3% of the trials were discarded. The RT
analysis revealed a main effect of congruency, t1(15) 5 3.43,
p < .004, prep 5 .971, d 5 1.77; t2(27) 5 2.86, p < .004,
prep 5 .963, d 5 1.10. RTs were shorter in the congruent condition than in the incongruent condition. There was no effect of
congruency in the error analysis (both ts < 1).

Procedure
Participants sat in front of a computer with an attached microphone and performed either the object- or the color-naming task.
The experimental software was DMDX (Forster & Forster,
2003). For both tasks, participants first were familiarized with
the objects and their names. On each trial, they saw a sequence
consisting of a fixation cross (700 ms), a blank screen (200 ms), a
picture (1,000 ms), and finally the picture with its name (1,000
ms). The appearance of the picture name cued participants to
name the picture aloud. Participants in the color-naming task
were then told the four color names that would be used in the
subsequent two phases. After familiarization, participants were
trained and then performed the experiment proper. These two
phases had identical trial structures: a fixation cross (700 ms),
followed by a blank screen (200 ms), followed by a picture of a
colored object (1,500 ms). Depending on the instructions, participants named the object or the color (with the adjective unmarked for grammatical gender) upon picture presentation.
There were eight trials in the training phase. The experiment
lasted 25 min.

Object Naming
Before analysis, 4.1% of the trials were discarded. Neither RTs
nor errors revealed an effect of congruency (all ts < 1).

Results
We report the results for color and object naming separately.
Trials with errors, nonvocal responses, and no responses were
discarded from the analysis. Reaction times (RTs) more than 3
standard deviations above or below a given participant’s mean
were also discarded. There was one main factor in each analysis:
phonological congruency (congruent vs. incongruent). Participants (t1) and items (t2) were random factors. Table 2 presents an
overview of the data.
TABLE 2
Mean Reaction Times (in Milliseconds) and 95% Confidence
Intervals (CIs) in Experiments 1 and 2
Condition
Experiment and task
Experiment 1: French
Color naming
Object naming
Experiment 2: English
Color naming
Object naming

Congruent Incongruent Difference 95% CI
595 (2.9)
660 (4.0)

622 (3.8)
664 (4.2)

27
4

11
9

616 (3.2)
689 (3.7)

619 (4.3)
705 (3.3)

3
16

6
6

Note. Error rates are given in parentheses.

218

Discussion
We found a phonological congruency effect in color naming (see
Navarrete & Costa, 2006), but not in object naming. These results are consistent with the assumption that word-order constraints modulate the activation of phonological representations.
This assumption predicts a phonological congruency effect in
color naming, but not in object naming, in languages with a
noun-adjective word order. However, an alternative, nonlinguistic interpretation is possible. The results could have been
due to differences in the speed of processing objects and colors,
which, in turn, could have led to differences in how fast the
phonology of object and color names was activated. If the phonology of the object name was activated faster than the phonology of the color name, then the activation of the object name’s
phonology would have affected color naming; object naming
would not have been affected by the color name’s phonology,
which would have been activated more slowly and therefore too
late. Note, however, that although object-naming latencies were
overall slower than color-naming latencies (Table 2), this does
not necessarily exclude the possibility that phonological activation was faster for object names than for color names.
In Experiment 2, we put this alternative hypothesis to a test
with native English speakers. In English, color adjectives appear before nouns—the opposite of the order in French. If the
results of Experiment 1 were due to language-independent
processing speeds of color and object names, then the same
pattern of phonological congruency effects would be expected in
English speakers. Alternatively, if the results of Experiment 1
were due to the influence of language-specific word-order constraints, then the opposite pattern would be expected: a phonological congruency effect in object naming, but not in color
naming.
EXPERIMENT 2: COLOR AND OBJECT NAMING IN
ENGLISH

Method
Participants
Thirty native speakers of English participated in the experiment. Half performed the color-naming task, and half the

Volume 19—Number 3

Niels Janssen, F.-Xavier Alario, and Alfonso Caramazza

object-naming task. All were students at Harvard University and
received course credit for participation.
Materials, Design, and Procedure
The design and procedure were the same as in Experiment 1.
The four colors were red, green, blue, and pink. Each color was
paired with 10 pictures (see Table 1), for a total of 80 experimental items. An additional 80 filler items were created as in
Experiment 1. Thus, overall there were 40 congruent and 120
incongruent trials.
Results
The analytical methods were the same as in Experiment 1.
Table 2 presents an overview of the data.
Color Naming
Before analysis, 3.8% of the trials were discarded. The RT
analysis revealed no effect of congruency on color naming (both
ts < 1), and neither did the error analysis, t1(14) 5 1.1, p 5 .31,
prep 5 .739, d 5 0.59; t2 < 1.
Object Naming
Before analysis, 3.5% of the trials were discarded. The RT
analysis revealed an effect of congruency, t1(14) 5 3.20, p <
.007, prep 5 .960, d 5 1.71; t2(39) 5 3.18, p < .003, prep 5 .980,
d 5 1.02. RTs were shorter in the congruent condition than in
the incongruent condition. There was no effect of congruency in
the error analysis (both ts < 1).
Discussion
In contrast to Experiment 1, Experiment 2 showed a phonological congruency effect for object naming, but not for color
naming. This rules out the possibility that the results of these
experiments are due to nonlinguistic differences in the retrieval
speed of object- and color-name phonology. If such were the
case, the same pattern of phonological congruency effects
should have been observed in the two experiments. The alternative word-order hypothesis provides a plausible account of the
contrasting results in French and English, based on a clear
contrastive property that differentiates these two languages.
Could other language-specific properties be responsible for
the results? Lexical properties are unlikely candidates. The
ratios of adjective lexical frequency to noun lexical frequency
for experimental items were similar in the two experiments
(M 5 20 in French and 15 in English), t(134) < 1), as were the
ratios of the number of letters in adjectives to the number
of letters in nouns (M 5 0.9 in both French and English),
t(134) < 1.
Another important difference between French and English
noun phrases is that French noun phrases often require grammatical gender agreement, whereas English noun phrases never
do (Corbett, 1991). Consider, then, the following scenario. If, in

Volume 19—Number 3

general, color names are retrieved faster than object names, this
would explain the English data. Differences in the speed of
color- and object-name retrieval would be reduced in languages
with grammatical gender, however, because the agreement
processes impose dependencies on adjective and noun retrieval.
In French, the phonological form of an adjective depends on the
grammatical gender of the corresponding noun. The faster processing of adjective phonology would be delayed until the
gender of the corresponding noun is available. Although suggestive, this explanation does not accurately account for the
pattern of results observed in Experiment 1. If the dependency
of gender agreement brings the speed of color-name processing
on a par with the speed of object-name processing, one would
expect a phonological congruency effect in both color and object
naming. Given that an effect was observed only for color naming,
this explanation is unlikely (as is any explanation that equates
the two activation speeds to honor agreement constraints).1
GENERAL DISCUSSION

In two experiments, participants were presented with colored
objects, and the phonological congruence between the color and
object name was manipulated. In Experiment 1, with French
participants, a phonological congruency effect was found for
color naming (see Navarrete & Costa, 2006), but not for object
naming. In Experiment 2, with English participants, the opposite pattern of results was obtained: a phonological congruency
effect for object naming, but not for color naming.
Language-independent processing speeds of colors and objects, or differences in the requirement for gender agreement
in the noun phrase, cannot account for these results. Rather,
we assume that language-specific word-order constraints modulate the phonological activation of color and object names
when colored objects are presented. Specifically, given that
nouns typically precede adjectives in French, the activation
of noun phonology is initially favored over the activation of
adjective phonology. Consequently, the activation of the object
name’s phonology primes color naming. Activation of the color
name’s phonology occurs later and therefore does not prime
object naming. The opposite pattern of results was expected, and
was observed, in English.
It is perhaps surprising that we demonstrated the phonological
congruency effect even though participants were producing
single words—adjectives or nouns—rather than complete noun
phrases. This means that the word-order constraint we postulate
is operational even for single-word utterances. This constraint
could stem from the partial activation of a canonically ordered
noun-phrase frame (e.g., Garrett, 1976), from word-order information present in the lexical representation of the items (e.g.,
1
To further tease apart the individual contributions of word order and gender
to our pattern of results, one could investigate the phonological congruency
effect in color and object naming in a language that shares relevant word-order
constraints with English and gender agreement with French (e.g., Dutch).

219

Word-Order Constraints

Levelt, 1989), or from statistically learned, biased mappings
linking objects and colors to nouns and adjectives (e.g., Dell,
Reed, Adams, & Meyer, 2000). For now, the results we report do
not favor one of these possibilities over the others. They indicate
that when multiple words are activated, the cascading activation
of their phonological representations is modulated by languagespecific word-order properties. This phenomenon provides some
insight into how word order is used during language production.
Acknowledgments—This research was supported by a Fyssen
Foundation postdoctoral fellowship to N.J. and by National Institutes of Health Grant DC04542 to A.C.

REFERENCES
Alario, F.-X., & Ferrand, L. (1999). A set of 400 pictures standardized
for French: Norms for name agreement, image agreement, familiarity, visual complexity, image variability, and age of acquisition. Behavior Research Methods, Instruments, & Computers, 31,
531–552.
Bates, E., Friederici, A., Wulfeck, B., & Juarez, L.A. (1988). On the
preservation of word order in aphasia. Brain and Language, 35,
323–336.
Bloem, I., & La Heij, W. (2003). Semantic facilitation and semantic
interference in word translation: Implications for models of lexical access in language production. Journal of Memory and Language, 48, 468–488.
Bock, J.K. (1987). An effect of the accessibility of word forms
on sentence structures. Journal of Memory and Language, 26,
119–137.
Cleland, A.A., & Pickering, M.J. (2003). The use of lexical and syntactic information in language production: Evidence from the
priming of noun-phrase structure. Journal of Memory and Language, 49, 214–230.
Corbett, G. (1991). Gender. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Costa, A., & Caramazza, A. (2002). The production of noun phrases in
English and Spanish: Implications for the scope of phonological
encoding in speech production. Journal of Memory and Language, 46, 178–198.
Damian, M.F., & Dumay, N. (2007). Time pressure and phonological
advance planning in spoken production. Journal of Memory and
Language, 57, 195–209.
Dell, G.S. (1986). A spreading-activation theory of retrieval in sentence production. Psychological Review, 93, 283–321.
Dell, G.S., Burger, L.K., & Svec, W.R. (1997). Language production
and serial order: A functional analysis and a model. Psychological Review, 104, 123–147.

220

Dell, G.S., Reed, K.D., Adams, D.R., & Meyer, A.S. (2000). Speech
errors, phonotactic constraints, and implicit learning: A study of
the role of experience in language production. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 26,
1355–1367.
Dell, G.S., & Reich, P.A. (1981). Stages in sentence production: An
analysis of speech error data. Journal of Verbal Learning and
Verbal Behavior, 20, 611–629.
Forster, K.I., & Forster, J.C. (2003). DMDX: A Windows display program with millisecond accuracy. Behavior Research Methods,
Instruments, & Computers, 35, 116–124.
Garrett, M.F. (1976). Syntactic processes in sentence production. In
R. Wales & E. Walker (Eds.), New approaches to language
mechanisms: A collection of psycholinguistic studies (pp. 133–
177). Amsterdam: North-Holland.
Goldrick, M. (2006). Limited interaction in speech production:
Chronometric, speech error, and neuropsychological evidence.
Language and Cognitive Processes, 21, 817–855.
Hartsuiker, R.J., & Westenberg, C. (2000). Word order priming in
written and spoken sentence production. Cognition, 27, 27–39.
Janssen, N. (2005). Processing dynamics of grammatical and phonological encoding in language production. Unpublished doctoral
dissertation, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA.
Jescheniak, J.D., Schriefers, H., & Hantsch, A. (2003). Utterance
format affects phonological priming in the picture-word task:
Implications for models of phonological encoding in speech
production. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 29, 441–454.
Levelt, W.J.M. (1989). Speaking: From intention to articulation.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Levelt, W.J.M., Roelofs, A., & Meyer, A.S. (1999). A theory of lexical
access in speech production [Target article and commentaries].
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 22, 1–75.
Meyer, A.S. (1996). Lexical access in phrase and sentence production:
Results from picture-word interference experiments. Journal of
Memory and Language, 35, 477–496.
Meyer, A.S., & Damian, M.F. (2007). Activation of distractor names in
the picture-picture interference paradigm. Memory & Cognition,
35, 494–503.
Morgan, J.L., & Meyer, A.S. (2005). Processing of extrafoveal objects
during multiple-object naming. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 31, 428–442.
Morsella, E., & Miozzo, M. (2002). Evidence for a cascade model of
lexical access in speech production. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 28, 555–563.
Navarrete, E., & Costa, A. (2006). Phonological activation of ignored
pictures: Further evidence for a cascade model of lexical access.
Journal of Memory and Language, 53, 359–377.

(RECEIVED 6/18/07; REVISION ACCEPTED 9/4/07)

Volume 19—Number 3

