PS YC HOLOGICA L SC IENCE

Research Article

The Best Men Are (Not Always)
Already Taken
Female Preference for Single Versus Attached Males
Depends on Conception Risk
Paola Bressan and Debora Stranieri
University of Padua

ABSTRACT—Because

men of higher genetic quality tend to
be poorer partners and parents than men of lower genetic
quality, women may proﬁt from securing a stable investment from the latter, while obtaining good genes via
extrapair mating with the former. Only if conception
occurs, however, do the evolutionary beneﬁts of such a
strategy overcome its costs. Accordingly, we predicted that
(a) partnered women should prefer attached men, because
such men are more likely than single men to have pairbonding qualities, and hence to be good replacement partners, and (b) this inclination should reverse when fertility
rises, because attached men are less available for impromptu sex than single men. In this study, 208 women
rated the attractiveness of men described as single or attached. As predicted, partnered women favored attached
men at the low-fertility phases of the menstrual cycle, but
preferred single men (if masculine, i.e., advertising good
genetic quality) when conception risk was high.
Women with a partner should prefer attached men when conception risk is low, and single men when conception risk is high.
We make this provocative statement on the basis of evolutionary
theories of human mating, and report here two studies that
tested, ﬁrst, the assumptions on which these predictions are
based and, second, the predictions themselves.
The starting point of our argument is the well-established fact
that, across a variety of species, including Homo sapiens, males
of high genetic quality are less inclined to invest in mates and
provide paternal care than are males of low genetic quality
(Gangestad & Simpson, 2000). In response, females appear to

Address correspondence to Paola Bressan, Dipartimento di
Psicologia Generale, Università di Padova, Via Venezia 8, 35131
Padova, Italy, e-mail: paola.bressan@unipd.it.

Volume 19—Number 2

have evolved a dual mating strategy: They prefer males who are
more willing to take care of them and of their offspring as longterm partners, but at the same time seek genetically superior
males as extrapair, short-term sexual mates (e.g., Smith, 1984).
The expectation that human females ought to value males who
exhibit indicators of prosocial behavior and likely investment in
future offspring is supported by evidence that, in the context of
long-term mating, women generally prefer ‘‘feminine’’ male faces,
presumably because of their association with positive personality
traits such as cooperation, loyalty, kindness, and willingness to
provide parental care (Penton-Voak et al., 1999; Perrett et al.,
1998). Current commitment to a woman is an honest signal of the
social-emotional qualities required for pair bonding, qualities that
unattached men may or may not have. Of these social-emotional
qualities, the social facet is primarily expressed by being in a
relationship, and the emotional one by being in love with one’s
partner. In this respect, men who are described as engaged, married, or in love should be a better catch than men who are not.
Still, a preference for attached men confers not only beneﬁts
but also costs—because, although these men are more likely
than unattached men to possess the attributes that make a good
long-term future partner, they are also less likely to actually
become one’s partner within a short time span. The negative
weight of this shortcoming must critically depend on whether a
woman is already in a romantic relationship. Partnered women
can afford to wait; indeed, the courtship period can be modeled
as a mechanism for holding partners before full commitment,
thereby allowing individuals to swap to better partners whenever
these become available (Simão & Todd, 2002). For partnered
women, the higher mate value of attached men is not offset by
their current lower availability for a long-term relationship;
therefore, women with a partner ought to prefer attached men.
Our predictions cannot, however, be complete until we consider the other side of dual mating, which concerns partnered

Copyright r 2008 Association for Psychological Science

145

Female Preference for Single Versus Attached Males

women only: the search for extrapair sexual mates. Female
adultery is punished severely in virtually every society, sometimes with violence and even death. Extrapair mating is risky,
and not necessarily efﬁcient either, because good genes can be
transmitted to offspring only if copulation is in fact followed by
conception. Accordingly, encounters with eligible sexual mates
can be evolutionarily rewarded only if they take place during the
fertile phase of a woman’s menstrual cycle. Indeed, at the time of
ovulation, extrapair copulations are overrepresented and associated with higher female sperm retention (Baker & Bellis,
1995); the frequency of fantasies about men other than one’s
partner rises at this time as well (Gangestad, Thornhill, & Garver, 2002).
How good are the chances of ﬁnding the right sex partner at
the right moment? A woman’s fertile phase is restricted to a small
window (6 days) within her monthly cycle, the onset of this
window is highly unpredictable (Wilcox, Dunson, & Baird,
2000), and the cycle itself recurs for only a limited number of
years. Ancestral women had later menarche and a shorter life
span compared with modern women, and therefore must have
had even fewer years of fertility. Most of those years would have
been spent in repeated pregnancies (some of which would have
turned out to be unfruitful because of high infant mortality) and
long periods of lactation. It has been argued that a woman might
have had only as few as a dozen ovulatory episodes in her lifetime (Pillsworth, Haselton, & Buss, 2004).
The rarity of opportunities for conception and the costs of
inﬁdelity render the timing of extrapair sex of crucial importance. When conception is likely, a partnered woman must ﬁnd a
mate who not only carries good genes, but also is available for
sex right away—before her fertile window closes. In this light,
attached men are less eligible than single men in at least three
respects: their need, occasion, and interest. Whereas it is obvious that attached men have less need and occasion than single
men, the contention that attached men are less interested is
supported by the observations that (a) many men choose longterm mating as their primary sexual strategy (Gangestad &
Simpson, 2000), (b) even those men who practice extrapair sex
do not usually do so indiscriminately (Buss & Schmitt, 1993),
and (c) positive assortative mating with respect to mate quality
(e.g., Kalick & Hamilton, 1986) implies that higher-quality men
tend to be paired with higher-quality women. High-quality attached men may therefore be particularly unwilling to serve as
lovers of women with low mate value. Yet the women who seek
(i.e., beneﬁt from) extrapair mating are indeed the women whose
primary partners are of lower quality, and who are thus likely to
have poor mate value themselves (see Pillsworth & Haselton,
2006).
From this line of reasoning, we derive the prediction that the
preference for attached versus unattached men, in women with a
partner, will be crucially inﬂuenced by conception risk. More
speciﬁcally, we predict that partnered women will prefer attached men when conception risk is low, and single men when

146

conception risk is high. Among single women, the two conﬂicting patterns of male appeal (being attached and thus romantically competent, being single and thus romantically
available) are likely to have different relative values for different
women, but present fertility status should be largely irrelevant—because it is in the evolutionary interest of single women
to seek a long-term, investing mate, rather than a short-term sex
partner (Buss & Schmitt, 1993).
The preference for good-genes markers, such as facial masculinity, has been shown to increase signiﬁcantly (a) when
conception is more probable and (b) in the context of short-term
rather than long-term mating (e.g., DeBruine et al., 2006). There
is widespread consensus that masculinity is an honest signal of
genetic quality, because only men with strong immune systems
can withstand the immunosuppressant effects of the high levels
of testosterone required to develop masculine features. We argue
that when fertility rises, partnered women will switch preference
from attached to single men because the latter are more accessible as short-term sex partners. On this basis, we make the
additional prediction that this switch should happen preferentially, or uniquely, when the men in question exhibit good-genes
markers, that is, if they look masculine rather than feminine.
In the two experiments reported in this article, we sought to
validate our assumptions and to test our predictions.
PREPARATORY STUDY: PERCEIVED QUALITIES OF
SINGLE AND ATTACHED MEN

In this preliminary study, we sought to validate the three assumptions on which our predictions are based: that relative to
attached men, single men are perceived as (a) more immediately
available for a sexual encounter, (b) more immediately available
as potential long-term partners, and (c) less likely to possess the
attributes of a good long-term partner.

Method
Twenty-six nonpregnant women, 12 with and 14 without a
partner (median age 5 22 years, range 5 19–33 years) volunteered to participate in the study. They were all students at the
University of Padua, and were recruited and tested individually.
Data from 7 additional participants were discarded because at
the end of the experiment these women reported using hormonal
contraceptives.
Twelve color photographs of faces of physically pleasant men
in their prime were scanned from fashion magazines and used as
stimuli. With the help of two additional female judges, we selected the men so as to cover different degrees of masculinity
and different degrees of attractiveness, to ensure that all participants would ﬁnd at least some of the men approachable. Each
picture was printed (10  15 cm in size) on paper and inserted
into a separate clear cover sheet. Each participant viewed the
pictures in a different random order.

Volume 19—Number 2

Paola Bressan and Debora Stranieri

In the literature on mate choice (e.g., Buss & Schmitt, 1993),
male attractiveness is routinely assessed in two separate contexts, long-term relationships (such as marriage) and short-term
relationships (such as a one-night stand or an affair within a
long-term relationship). However, an informal survey conducted
prior to this study showed that asking questions in these terms
(e.g., ‘‘which man would you prefer for a one-night stand?’’)
made partnered women defensive; we therefore decided to refer
generically to ‘‘attractiveness,’’ thereby avoiding explicit references to inﬁdelity. Accordingly, in the ﬁrst part of the experiment, participants were asked to judge whether each face was (a)
more attractive than average and (b) more masculine than average. In the second part of the experiment, there were no pictures; participants were asked to consider (in turn and in random
order) a man who is single, a man who has a girlfriend, a man who
is married, and a man who is in love. For each of these men, they
were asked to answer the following questions, using a scale from
1 to 10: ‘‘How likely is it that this person has the qualities to be a
good partner for a stable, long-term relationship?’’ ‘‘How easy
would it be to have a sexual encounter with this person, today?’’
‘‘How easy would it be to acquire this person as a partner for a
stable, long-term relationship, today?’’ The order of these questions was randomized between subjects.

Results
‘‘Yes’’ and ‘‘no’’ answers to the questions in the ﬁrst part of the
experiment were scored as ‘‘1’’ and ‘‘0,’’ respectively. The 12
faces were uniformly distributed on both the attractiveness
(range 5 .08–.88) and masculinity (range 5 .04–1.00) dimensions.
We averaged the ratings for a married man, a man with a
girlfriend, and a man in love to form a composite score for ‘‘attached’’ men. For each participant and each question, we
computed the advantage of single men (the rating given to the
single man minus the mean rating given to attached men).
Relative to attached men, single men were considered more
immediately available for a sexual encounter, more immediately
available as long-term partners, and less likely to possess the
attributes of a good long-term partner. The one-sample t tests
were all signiﬁcant both overall, t(25) 5 8.38, t(25) 5 9.22, and
t(25) 5 4.16, respectively, all ps < .0001, preps > .99, and
separately for partnered and unpartnered women (throughout
this article, all tests are two-tailed).
For each participant and each question, we also compared the
ratings obtained for the three categories of attached men (married, with a girlfriend, and in love). Men with a girlfriend were
regarded as more immediately available both as long-term
partners and for an impromptu sexual encounter, relative to
either married men or men in love (all ps < .05, preps > .88);
ratings for the latter two categories did not differ signiﬁcantly.
Men in love were regarded as more likely to possess the attributes of a good long-term partner relative to either married men

Volume 19—Number 2

or men with a girlfriend (both ps < .02, preps > .93); ratings for
the latter two categories did not differ signiﬁcantly. Therefore, if
we consider the three complementary aspects of our argument
together (being a good partner, being available as a partner,
being available for sex), men with a girlfriend ranked ﬁrst, men
in love ranked in the middle, and married men ranked last.

MAIN STUDY: ATTRACTIVENESS OF MEN DESCRIBED
AS SINGLE OR ATTACHED

Our main study was designed to test the predictions based on the
assumptions that we validated in the preparatory study, namely,
that women with a partner will prefer attached men during the
less fertile days of their cycle and single men during the more
fertile days of their cycle. On the basis of previous literature and
theory, we also predicted that the high-fertility preference for
single men will be strongest for men whose faces are more
masculine than average. Additionally, after obtaining the results
of the preparatory study, we predicted that the effect will tend to
be strongest when the attached man is described as having a
girlfriend, and weakest when he is described as married.

Method
Participants
Participants were 220 nonpregnant women, 110 with and 110
without a partner. They were all students at the University of
Padua, and were recruited and tested individually. Data from 12
participants were discarded from the analyses because at the
end of the experiment these women reported using hormonal
contraceptives (10) or not being heterosexual (2). (Unlike the
question about having a partner, the latter two questions were
asked at the end of the experiment, because at the start they
might have seemed intrusive.) Thus, the ﬁnal sample consisted
of 208 women (median age 5 21.6 years, range 5 18–35 years).
Each woman’s menstrual-cycle day was standardized by dividing the number of days since the ﬁrst day of her last menstrual
period by the reported typical cycle length and multiplying the
quotient by 28. On the basis of this 28-day standardized cycle,
the women were divided into a high-conception-risk group
(Days 8–20, n 5 97) and a low-conception-risk group (Days 1–7
and 21–28, n 5 101). This subdivision resulted from applying
the formula that, when only the onset of previous menstruation is
known, has been shown to predict pregnancy probability across
the menstrual cycle most accurately, that is, the average midcycle rule (Lamprecht & Grummer-Strawn, 1996). Alternative
splits, such as between high-estrogen (Days 12–21) and lowestrogen (Days 1–11 and 22–28) groups (Fisher, 2004), did not
alter the results. Data from 10 women who were on standardized
days between 29 and 35, and therefore likely to be experiencing
an abnormal menstrual cycle, were excluded.

147

Female Preference for Single Versus Attached Males

Stimuli
The stimuli were the male faces used in the preparatory study.
The photographs were presented in an album, in a different
random order for each participant. Each photo was accompanied
by one of four possible labels: ‘‘this person is single,’’ ‘‘this person
is in love,’’ ‘‘this person has a girlfriend,’’ and ‘‘this person is
married.’’ Although the photographs were the same for all participants, four versions of the album were prepared so that each
photo was paired (between subjects) with all four descriptions.
Procedure
The four album versions were presented to four groups of 55
participants each (in the ﬁnal sample, these groups included 52,
52, 54, and 50 women). Participants were asked to imagine
being at a party (with their partner, if they had one) and seeing
the man portrayed in each photograph. They had to rate his attractiveness on an 11-point scale (0 5 not at all attractive, 10 5
very attractive). Before giving each rating, participants read
aloud the description that accompanied the photograph. There
was no time limit. At the end, participants completed a questionnaire that asked for basic demographic information and
menstrual-cycle information, and also included several items
concerning their current relationship, if they were romantically
involved.

Results
Table 1 presents the mean attractiveness ratings for all experimental conditions and groups. For our ﬁrst analysis, as in the
preparatory study, we created a composite measure by averaging
TABLE 1
Mean Attractiveness Ratings of Male Faces by Female
Participants
Partnered women
Category of men
Masculine
Single
Married
In love
With a girlfriend
Feminine
Single
Married
In love
With a girlfriend
All men
Single
Attached
Preference for single men

Unpartnered
women

Fertile Nonfertile Fertile Nonfertile
5.99
5.63
5.34
5.43

5.17
5.34
5.72
5.65

6.38
6.66
6.18
5.90

6.16
6.46
6.16
6.32

4.26
4.33
4.76
3.57

3.91
4.36
4.23
4.86

4.59
4.85
4.54
4.84

4.83
4.93
4.42
5.03

5.37
4.87
0.50

4.67
5.08
0.41

5.50
5.56
0.05

5.63
5.63
0.00

Note. The last row shows the average preference for single men (for each
participant, this preference was computed as the mean rating given to single
men minus the mean rating given to attached men).

148

the attractiveness ratings for the married men, men with a
girlfriend, and men in love. We ran an overall repeated measures
analysis of variance (ANOVA) with a within-subjects factor of
man’s availability (single, attached) and between-subjects factors of participant’s conception risk (low, high) and partnership
status (partnered, unpartnered).
Across conditions, male faces were rated as more attractive by
women without a partner (M 5 5.6) than by women with a partner
(M 5 5.0), F(1, 194) 5 10.10, p 5 .002, prep 5 .98. More interestingly, man’s availability and participant’s conception risk
did not have signiﬁcant main effects (both Fs < 1), but were
involved in a signiﬁcant triple interaction with participant’s
partnership status, F(1, 194) 5 7.16, p 5 .008, prep 5 .96. As
separate ANOVAs revealed, this signiﬁcant interaction was due
to the fact that man’s availability and participant’s conception
risk interacted signiﬁcantly for partnered women, F(1, 98) 5
11.19, p 5 .001, prep 5 .99, but not for unpartnered ones, F(1,
96) < 1. For each participant, we computed the preference for
single men (the mean rating given to single men minus the mean
rating given to attached men). This preference was unrelated to
conception risk in unpartnered women, Pearson r 5 .02, p >
.8, prep < .28, n 5 98, being essentially zero whether they were
fertile or nonfertile (both one-sample ts < 1). However, in
women with a partner, the preference for single men increased
signiﬁcantly with conception risk, Pearson r 5 .32, p 5 .001,
prep 5 .99, n 5 100 (effect size d 5 0.70). More speciﬁcally,
nonfertile women favored men described as attached, onesample t(49) 5 2.28, p 5 .03, prep 5 .91, but fertile women
were more attracted to men described as single, t(49) 5 2.45,
p 5 .02, prep 5 .93.
One corollary of our hypothesis that fertile women switch their
preference toward single men because such men are more accessible for short-term sex is that this turnaround should, especially or uniquely, apply to men who look more masculine than
average, because masculinity is a proxy for immunological
competence. To test this prediction, we divided the men into two
groups, the masculine group (the 5 men who had been rated as
more masculine than average in the preparatory study, mean
rating 5 .85) and the feminine group (the 7 men who had been
rated as less masculine than average, mean rating 5 .22). Fertile
women with partners preferred single men to attached men only
when the men were masculine, one-sample t(34) 5 2.82, p 5
.008, prep 5 .96, and not when they were feminine, t(49) < |1|
(see Fig. 1).
Finally, for each participant, we computed the preference for
men described as single relative to each speciﬁc category of
attached men (married, with a girlfriend, and in love). In unpartnered women, these preferences were all unrelated to conception risk, all rs < |.08|, all ps > .4, preps < .57. In partnered
women, preferences for single men over men with a girlfriend,
men in love, and married men all increased with conception risk;
the correlations were, respectively, r 5 .40, p < .0001, prep > .99
(effect size d 5 0.86, a large effect in Cohen’s, 1988, terms); r 5

Volume 19—Number 2

Paola Bressan and Debora Stranieri

Fig. 1. Mean preference for single (vs. attached) men among nonfertile
and fertile women with partners. Positive values indicate a preference for
single men, and negative values indicate a preference for attached men.
Error bars correspond to 1 SEM.

.24, p 5 .02, prep 5 .93 (effect size d 5 0.49, a medium effect);
and r 5 .17, p 5 .09, prep 5 .83 (effect size d 5 0.33, a small
effect). As predicted, the preference reversal was strongest when
the attached man was portrayed as simply having a girlfriend,
and weakest when he was portrayed as married. Figure 2 shows
the change in preference for single men over men with a girlfriend across the menstrual cycle.
All women with partners felt committed (mean commitment
was 4.2 on a scale from 1 to 5) and happy with their relationships
(mean relationship quality was 8.1 on a scale from 1 to 10). At
the time of measurement, the women had been in their relationships for 21 months on average. Mean commitment, relationship quality, and duration of relationship did not differ
signiﬁcantly between fertile and nonfertile women (all ts < |1|).
GENERAL DISCUSSION

We predicted and found that women with a partner are more
attracted to attached than to single men when conception risk is
low, but that this preference reverses strikingly among fertile
women. The critical dependence of the effect on conception risk
can explain why the only work that experimentally explored the
issue of female preferences for attached men (Uller & Johansson, 2003) found no effect. The research we report here suggests
that there may have been at least two separate reasons for the
null ﬁnding. First, in that study, women interacted with two men
who signaled their single or attached status via a wedding ring,

Volume 19—Number 2

Fig. 2. Mean preference for single men (relative to men with a girlfriend)
as a function of day in the menstrual cycle, for women without (top panel)
and with (bottom panel) partners. High-fertility days run from Day 8 to
Day 20 (three middle points), with a peak on Days 12 through 15 (corresponding to the central point). Positive values indicate a preference for
single men, and negative values indicate a preference for men with a
girlfriend. Error bars correspond to 1 SEM.

but our results show that any preference for attached men is
reduced if the men are perceived as married, rather than as
temporarily attached. Second, and most important, although the
participants’ relationship status was controlled, their fertility
status was not. If about half the partnered participants were in
either the ﬁrst or last week of their cycles, and the other half in
the middle two weeks (as, on the basis of chance alone, was very
likely the case), the opposite preferences for single and attached
men would have canceled each other out, resulting in a net null
effect.
A potential alternative explanation for the positive correlation
between conception risk and attraction to single men is that a
woman should be especially wary of mating with men who may

149

Female Preference for Single Versus Attached Males

not economically invest in her children, such as men who are in
exclusive relationships with other women. Indeed, females rate
increased risk of raising a baby on one’s own as one of the most
signiﬁcant costs of ‘‘mate poaching’’ (Davies, Shackelford, &
Goetz, 2006). However, this account would predict a correlation
only (or mainly) for unpartnered women and not for partnered
women, who already have a potentially investing ‘‘father’’ on
their side.
Our results suggest that the preference for single men during
fertile days occurs only for men whose faces look masculine,
supporting our conjecture that such an adjustment may have
evolved to increase the chances of securing a high-quality
sexual partner. Men offering superior genes do not materialize at
will; and when they do, they tend to be already pair-bonded and
thus less accessible than men with poorer genes. As the saying
goes, the best men are already taken. Those who are still ‘‘on the
market’’ might well have a commitment problem, and caution
should be exercised before ‘‘purchase.’’ The same caution,
however, does not pay back in a short-term mating context. In
other words, partnered women would do well to be suspicious of
masculine single men as replacement partners, because there
could be a good reason why these men are single; yet maintaining a disinclination for masculine single men when shopping
for genes (rather than for a new long-term partner) may prove
self-defeating, or at least it would have in humans’ evolutionary
history.
Scarcity of suitable mates must have been a concrete problem
within Pleistocene mating networks, which ranged between 175
and 475 individuals of both sexes, less than half of reproductive
age (Wobst, 1974). Even assuming an equal sex ratio (rather
than, more realistically, a ratio unbalanced in favor of females),
the total number of males ages 20 through 45 in a network of
average size would have been about 50, and of course only a
small percentage of these would have had high mate value. Thus,
our ﬁnding of a signiﬁcant interaction between women’s fertility
and men’s relationship status in partnered women’s preferences
may be explained by two contingencies. First, in these women,
interest for men advertising immunocompetence peaks at ovulation, temporarily replacing interest for men advertising family
qualities. Second, immunocompetent men are more available as
sexual mates if they are not pair-bonded.
Evolved cognitive adaptations are typically (a) context dependent and (b) stimulus-class dependent. The evolutionary
psychology of human mating suggests that the female search for
‘‘casual’’ sex pays dividends (a) only to fertile women with
partners and (b) only if the male recipient is chosen with care. In
practice, within a short time frame, a suitable sex partner must
be singled out, seduced, and lured into a private situation in
which consummation can occur. This requires precious and irreversible investment of time and energy into an individual
male, who may, at any point of the pursuit, turn out to be uninterested. Ancestral women who, all else being equal, preferred
to allocate their time and energy to an unattached man rather

150

than to an attached one would have been more likely than others
to succeed, and to transmit such a preference to their daughters.
In humans’ evolutionary past, the switch in preference from
less to more sexually accessible men associated with each
ovulatory episode would have been highly adaptive. Our data are
consistent with the idea that, although the length of a woman’s
reproductive lifetime and the extent of the potential mating
network have expanded considerably over the past 50,000 years,
this unconscious strategy guides women’s mating choices still.
Acknowledgments—Part of this research was submitted to the
Department of General Psychology at the University of Padua as
an undergraduate thesis by Debora Stranieri, under the supervision of Paola Bressan. We are indebted to Peter Kramer for
precious discussion.
REFERENCES
Baker, R.R., & Bellis, M.A. (1995). Human sperm competition. London: Chapman & Hall.
Buss, D.M., & Schmitt, D. (1993). Sexual strategies theory: An evolutionary perspective on human mating. Psychological Review,
100, 204–232.
Cohen, J. (1988). Statistical power analysis for the behavioral sciences
(2nd ed.). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Davies, A.P.C., Shackelford, T.K., & Goetz, A.T. (2006). ‘‘Attached’’ or
‘‘unattached’’: With whom do men and women prefer to mate, and
why? Psychological Topics, 15, 297–314.
DeBruine, L.M., Jones, B.C., Little, A.C., Boothroyd, L.G., Perrett,
D.I., Penton-Voak, I.S., et al. (2006). Correlated preferences for
facial masculinity and ideal or actual partner’s masculinity.
Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 273,
1355–1360.
Fisher, M.L. (2004). Female intrasexual competition decreases female
facial attractiveness. Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 271(Suppl. 5), S283–S285.
Gangestad, S.W., & Simpson, J.A. (2000). The evolution of human
mating: Trade-offs and strategic pluralism. Behavioral and Brain
Sciences, 23, 573–644.
Gangestad, S.W., Thornhill, R., & Garver, C.E. (2002). Changes in
women’s sexual interests and their partners’ mate retention tactics across the menstrual cycle: Evidence for shifting conﬂicts of
interest. Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences,
269, 975–982.
Kalick, S.M., & Hamilton, T.E. (1986). The matching hypothesis reexamined. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 51,
673–682.
Lamprecht, V.M., & Grummer-Strawn, L. (1996). Development of new
formulas to identify the fertile time of the menstrual cycle.
Contraception, 54, 339–343.
Penton-Voak, I.S., Perrett, D.I., Castles, D.L., Burt, D.M., Kobayashi,
T., Murray, L.K., & Minamisawa, R. (1999). Menstrual cycle alters face preference. Nature, 399, 741–742.
Perrett, D.I., Lee, K.J., Penton-Voak, I.S., Rowland, D., Yoshikawa, S.,
Burt, D.M., et al. (1998). Effects of sexual dimorphism on facial
attractiveness. Nature, 394, 884–887.
Pillsworth, E.G., & Haselton, M.G. (2006). Male sexual attractiveness
predicts differential ovulatory shifts in female extra-pair attrac-

Volume 19—Number 2

Paola Bressan and Debora Stranieri

tion and male mate retention. Evolution and Human Behavior, 27,
247–258.
Pillsworth, E.G., Haselton, M.G., & Buss, D.M. (2004). Ovulatory
shifts in female sexual desire. Journal of Sex Research, 41, 55–65.
Simão, J., & Todd, P.M. (2002). Modeling mate choice in monogamous
mating systems with courtship. Adaptive Behavior, 10, 113–136.
Smith, R.L. (1984). Human sperm competition. In R.L. Smith (Ed.),
Sperm competition and the evolution of animal mating systems
(pp. 601–659). New York: Academic Press.
Uller, T., & Johansson, L.C. (2003). Human mate choice and the
wedding ring effect: Are married men more attractive? Human
Nature, 14, 267–276.

Volume 19—Number 2

Wilcox, A.J., Dunson, D., & Baird, D.D. (2000). The timing of the
‘fertile window’ in the menstrual cycle: Day speciﬁc estimates
from a prospective study. British Medical Journal, 321, 1259–
1262.
Wobst, H.M. (1974). Boundary conditions for Paleolithic social systems: A simulation approach. American Antiquity, 39, 147–178.

(RECEIVED 4/7/07; REVISION ACCEPTED 7/14/07)

151

