Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition
2008, Vol. 34, No. 3, 514 –523

Copyright 2008 by the American Psychological Association
0278-7393/08/$12.00 DOI: 10.1037/0278-7393.34.3.514

The Stroop Effect: Why Proportion Congruent Has Nothing to Do With
Congruency and Everything to Do With Contingency
James R. Schmidt and Derek Besner

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

University of Waterloo
The item-specific proportion congruent (ISPC) effect refers to the observation that the Stroop effect is
larger for words that are presented mostly in congruent colors (e.g., BLUE presented 75% of the time in
blue) and smaller for words that are presented mostly in a given incongruent color (e.g., YELLOW
presented 75% of the time in orange). One account of the ISPC effect, the modulation hypothesis, is that
participants modulate attention based on the identity of the word (i.e., participants allow the word to
influence responding when it is presented mostly in its congruent color). Another account, the contingency hypothesis, is that participants use the word to predict the response that they will need to make
(e.g., if the word is YELLOW, then the response is probably “orange”). Reanalyses of data from L. L.
Jacoby, D. S. Lindsay, and S. Hessels (2003), along with results from new experiments, are inconsistent
with the modulation hypothesis but entirely consistent with the contingency hypothesis. A response
threshold mechanism that uses contingency information provides a sufficient account of the data.
Keywords: contingency learning, Stroop, proportion congruent, ISPC, attention

results are consistent with the contingency hypothesis of Schmidt
et al. but are very problematic for the long-standing modulation
hypothesis. Possible mechanisms by which participants use contingency information to control responding are considered, and one
of them is tested. Both the response time and error data are
consistent with this proposed mechanism. We suggest that the
modulation account of the proportion congruency effect, dominant
for over 20 years, has run its course. Instead, we argue that the data
are better understood in terms of contingency learning.

Research on contingency learning has deep roots in both the
animal learning and cognitive psychology literatures (e.g., Rescorla & Wagner, 1972; Shanks, 2007). One popular domain for
this approach in cognitive psychology is the Stroop paradigm. The
standard Stroop effect refers to the well-replicated finding that
participants take longer to identify the print color of an incongruent color word (e.g., the word GREEN printed in red; GREENred)
relative to a congruent color word (REDred; Stroop, 1935; see
MacLeod, 1991, for a review). The magnitude of the Stroop effect
changes when the proportion of congruent items is manipulated
(Lowe & Mitterer, 1982). In particular, the magnitude of the
Stroop effect increases as the proportion of congruent trials increases. The standard account of the influence of proportion congruent trials is that the detection of these proportions allows
participants to modulate attention to the word, thereby changing
the size of the Stroop effect (e.g., Cheesman & Merikle, 1986;
Lindsay & Jacoby, 1994; Lowe & Mitterer, 1982). However,
Schmidt, Crump, Cheesman, and Besner (2007) have suggested
that contingency learning provides a sufficient account of the
proportion congruency effect. In this article, we first provide a
reanalysis of data from Jacoby, Lindsay, and Hessels (2003). We
then report new experiments from our own laboratory whose

Proportion Congruency and the Modulation Hypothesis
A number of experiments (Cheesman & Merikle, 1986; Lindsay
& Jacoby, 1994; Lowe & Mitterer, 1982) have shown that the
magnitude of the Stroop effect can be modulated by varying the
proportion of congruent trials. Specifically, the Stroop effect is
larger when most of the trials in the experiment are congruent
(high proportion congruent) than when most of the trials are
incongruent (low proportion congruent). The standard explanation
of this effect (Cheesman & Merikle, 1986; Lindsay & Jacoby,
1994; Lowe & Mitterer, 1982), here termed the modulation hypothesis, is that participants strategically modulate attention to the
word depending on the proportion of congruent items. For instance, when the word and color match most of the time (high
proportion congruent), participants attend to the word more than
usual. This will speed up responses on congruent trials (increased
facilitation) and slow down responses on incongruent trials (increased interference), making for a larger Stroop effect. In contrast, when the word and the color mismatch most of the time (low
proportion congruent), participants make a greater effort to ignore
the word. This serves to decrease both facilitation from congruent
words and interference from incongruent words, making for a
smaller Stroop effect. Thus, the modulation account holds that
participants use information about proportion congruency to drive

James R. Schmidt and Derek Besner, Department of Psychology, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, Ontario, Canada.
This research was supported by a Natural Sciences and Engineering
Research Council (NSERC) Canada Graduate Scholarship to James R.
Schmidt and NSERC Grant AO998 to Derek Besner. We are particularly
grateful to L. L. Jacoby and Carole Jacoby for providing the raw data from
Jacoby et al. (2003).
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to James R.
Schmidt, Department of Psychology, University of Waterloo, 200 University Avenue West, Waterloo, Ontario N2L 3G1, Canada. E-mail:
j4schmid@watarts.uwaterloo.ca
514

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

CONTINGENCY LEARNING AND RESPONSE PREDICTION

the degree to which they will attend to the word, and thus to allow
the word to impact performance in color identification.
The modulation hypothesis seems to be the most widely accepted explanation for the proportion congruent effect. For instance, Lowe and Mitterer (1982) concluded that their findings
“demonstrate the strategic modulation of selective attention” (p.
698), and Lindsay and Jacoby (1994) stated that the effect “suggests that when most items are incongruent, subjects somehow
inhibit the influence of word-reading processes, relative to when
most items are congruent” (p. 225).
Although intuitively appealing, the modulation hypothesis has
difficulty explaining some findings. Given the assumption that
participants modulate attention to the word, it would be expected
that this modulation would be experiment-wide. That is, words
should be ignored throughout a low proportion congruent block
and attended to throughout a high proportion congruent block.
However, Jacoby et al. (2003) manipulated proportion congruency
for each item (i.e., each color word) such that some words were
presented most often in their congruent color (e.g., BLUEblue) and
other words were presented most often in a particular incongruent
color (e.g., ORANGEyellow). A proportion congruent effect was
still observed, even though high and low proportion congruent
stimuli were intermixed in the same block of trials. Jacoby et al.
labeled this finding the item-specific proportion congruent (ISPC)
effect. As Jacoby et al. point out, this finding is difficult to
accommodate within the modulation hypothesis framework, because it would have to be assumed that participants are modulating
attention to the word on a trial-by-trial basis depending on the
identity of the word (e.g., if the word is BLUE, then the word is
attended, but if the word is ORANGE, then the word is ignored). In
essence, to defend the modulation account it would have to be
maintained that participants decide whether to attend to the word
after they have already read it.

Response Prediction and the Contingency Hypothesis
A different account of the ISPC effect, here termed the contingency hypothesis, is that participants implicitly learn contingencies
(i.e., correlations) between words and responses and then use these
contingencies to predict the specific response associated with each
distracting word (Schmidt et al., 2007). For instance, if the word
ORANGE is presented most often in yellow, then upon processing
the word ORANGE participants will (unconsciously) predict that
the correct response is “yellow.” This response prediction allows
participants to shortcut some processing (thus speeding responding) when the predicted response is the correct one. When a word
accurately predicts the correct response (e.g., BLUEblue, where
BLUE is presented most often in blue), we call this a high contin-

515

gency trial. When the word predicts the wrong response (e.g.,
BLUEgreen), we call this a low contingency trial. When the word
does not predict a specific response (e.g., PINKbrown, where PINK
is presented equally often in all colors), we call this a medium
contingency trial.
We are not, of course, the first to point to a role for contingency
in the Stroop task. Dishon-Berkovits and Algom (2000; see also
Melara & Algom, 2003; Sabri, Melara, & Algom, 2001) have
argued that when words and colors are correlated, participants will
pick up on this cue, attend to the content of the word, and use that
content to aid responding. For instance, in three experiments using
a word–word version of the Stroop task, Dishon-Berkovits and
Algom demonstrated that a Stroop effect is observed only when
the correlation between words and colors is nonchance. According
to these authors, when the correlation is chance, participants do not
attend to the content of the distracting word. Although their account is not as specified as the current account (indeed, their
argument could even be construed as a variant of the modulation
hypothesis), their work is important because it highlights the
importance of correlated events on responding.
Although the modulation hypothesis has difficulty explaining
the ISPC effect, the contingency hypothesis does not. According to
the contingency hypothesis, in the high proportion congruent condition responses to congruent trials will be faster than usual,
because participants can use the word to successfully predict the
response (e.g., BLUEblue; high contingency). The same advantage
does not occur for incongruent trials in this condition because, for
instance, BLUE does not accurately predict an incongruent “green”
response (low contingency). Thus, by speeding congruent but not
incongruent trials, the difference between incongruent and congruent trials (the Stroop effect) will be larger (i.e., relative to a
condition where words are not predictive of responses). Similarly,
in the low proportion congruent condition responses will be faster
for incongruent items because participants can use the word to
successfully predict the response (e.g., ORANGEyellow; high contingency). The same advantage does not occur for congruent trials
in this condition because, for instance, ORANGE predicts a “yellow,” not an “orange,” response (low contingency). Thus, by
speeding incongruent but not congruent trials, the overall Stroop
effect will be smaller.
According to the contingency hypothesis, then, proportion congruency manipulations are confounded with contingency. Specifically, as demonstrated in Table 1, in the high proportion congruent condition the magnitude of the Stroop effect is inflated due to
confounding higher word-response contingencies for the congruent (.75) relative to incongruent (.25) items. Similarly, in the low
proportion congruent condition the Stroop effect is reduced due to

Table 1
Relationship Between Proportion Congruency, Congruency, and Contingency
Proportion congruency
Congruency

High

Medium

Low

Congruent
Incongruent

High (.75) contingency (e.g., BLUEblue)a
Low (.25) contingency (e.g., BLUEgreen)

Medium (.50) contingency
Medium (.50) contingency

Low (.25) contingency (e.g., ORANGEorange)
High (.75) contingency (e.g., ORANGEyellow)a

a

Congruent and incongruent trials are not matched for contingency in the high and low proportion congruent conditions.

SCHMIDT AND BESNER

confounding higher word-response contingencies for the incongruent (.75) relative to congruent (.25) items. Fixing this confound is
as simple as rearranging the cells in the design. Rather than
comparing high contingency congruent trials with low contingency
incongruent trials (the high proportion congruent condition), we
can compare high contingency congruent trials (from the high
proportion congruent condition) with high contingency incongruent trials (from the low proportion congruent condition). Similarly,
rather than comparing low contingency congruent trials with high
contingency incongruent trials (the low proportion congruent condition), we can compare low contingency congruent trials (from
the low proportion congruent condition) with low contingency
incongruent trials (from the high proportion congruent condition).
After making this adjustment, the contingency hypothesis predicts
a main effect of Stroop trial type (congruent, incongruent), a main
effect of contingency (high, medium, low), and, more critically, no
interaction between the two (given that we assume Stroop and
contingency affect different processes). In contrast, the modulation
hypothesis predicts an interaction because incongruent trials
should be more affected by attention, given that the majority of the
Stroop effect is interference, with little or no facilitation from
congruent trials (see MacLeod, 1991, for a review).

contingency trials (where the predicted response is incorrect) relative to medium contingency trials, because on both low and
medium contingency trials the response threshold for the correct
response is maintained at the same level. For instance, if BLUE is
presented most often in blue, then when participants are given the
low contingency trial BLUEgreen they will see the word BLUE and
expect a “blue” response. As such, the response threshold for the
(incorrect) “blue” response will be lowered, but the threshold for
the (correct) “green” response will not be changed. As a result, it
will take just as long to make a correct “green” response as it
would if no prediction were made. Critically, then, the contingency
hypothesis predicts response facilitation, but not response interference for response times.
It is important to emphasize the reason that this account does not
predict interference on low contingency trials. On a low contingency trial (e.g., BLUEgreen), the distracting word is predictive of
a specific response (i.e., BLUE predicts a “blue” key response).
Thus, the threshold for this predicted response will be lowered.
However, the response threshold for the remaining colors (green,
yellow, and orange) will be unaltered. Because the correct response (“green”) is not the predicted response (“blue”), correct
response latencies will not be speeded.

Facilitation and Interference

Summary

The contingency hypothesis claims that participants use response prediction to speed responses on high contingency trials.
There are undoubtedly many mechanisms that could be proposed
to explain how this occurs. For the purpose of this article, we test
the a priori hypothesis that participants prepare for a response by
simply lowering the threshold for the expected response and do not
alter the threshold for any other. As shown in Figure 1, for
instance, if the word ORANGE is presented most often in yellow,
then presentation of the word ORANGE will lead the participant to
reduce the threshold for a “yellow” response. Consequently, it will
take less activation of this potential response for it to be made. This
mechanism therefore predicts response time facilitation on high
contingency trials (where the predicted response is correct) relative
to medium contingency trials (where no prediction is made).
However, no interference for response time is expected on low

The first goal of the present investigation is to reanalyze the
Jacoby et al. (2003) ISPC Stroop experiment to test predictions
derived from the contingency hypothesis. Specifically, it is expected that the contingency effect and the Stroop effect reflect the
action of distinct processes whose joint effects are additive on
response time. Therefore (and contrary to the modulation account),
there should be no interaction between Stroop trial type (congruent
vs. incongruent) and contingency. That is, the size of the Stroop
effect should be the same for words with .75 contingencies (i.e.,
high-proportion-congruent congruent words vs. low-proportioncongruent incongruent words) as it is for words with .25 contingencies (i.e., low-proportion-congruent congruent words vs. highproportion-congruent incongruent words) or any other
contingency. Both congruent and incongruent trials should be
faster in the high contingency condition, but the difference between congruent and incongruent trials should not vary with contingency. In a final analysis, high contingency and low contingency trials are compared to medium (chance) contingency trials
to assess, respectively, facilitation and interference. On the basis of
the response prediction mechanism, the expectation is that the
contingency effect will be solely facilitative for response latencies.
In other words, although there is a benefit in responding to items
where the words have greater than chance contingencies, there is
no cost in responding to items where the words have lower than
chance contingencies.

Response Activation

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

516

Standard
Threshold
(orange)
High Contingency
Threshold
(yellow)

Reanalysis 1: Jacoby et al. (2003) Response Latencies
Time to Response
Figure 1. Response threshold model of contingency effects. If ORANGE
is presented most often in yellow, then when ORANGE is presented the
threshold for the “yellow” response will be lower than the threshold for all
other potential responses (e.g., “orange”).

Method
Sixteen participants named out loud the color (green, white,
blue, yellow) of color words (GREEN, WHITE, BLUE, YELLOW).
Individual words were presented 75%, 50%, or 25% of the time in
their congruent color, and in a selected incongruent color the

remaining trials (i.e., each word appeared in two colors only).
Further details on the method of this experiment can be found in
the original article by Jacoby et al. (2003). For the purpose of these
analyses, the means for congruent and incongruent trials in Experiment 2A of Jacoby et al. were rearranged as a function of
word-response contingency: high (.75), medium (.50), and low
(.25). Thus, the high contingency condition consists of congruent
trials with high proportion congruent words and incongruent trials
with low proportion congruent words, the medium contingency
condition consists of congruent and incongruent trials with medium proportion congruent words, and the low contingency condition consists of congruent trials with low proportion congruent
words and incongruent trials with high proportion congruent
words.

Results
The response latency data (along with the original organization
of the data) are presented in Figure 2. A 3 (contingency; high,
medium, low) ⫻ 2 (Stroop trial type; congruent, incongruent)
analysis of variance (ANOVA) for response latencies revealed a
main effect for contingency, F(2, 30) ⫽ 3.848, MSE ⫽ 1,513, p ⫽

Response Latency (ms)

750

ORIGINAL ANALYSIS
Incongruent
Congruent

700

650

600

550
High

Medium

Low

Proportion Congruency

750
Response Latency (ms)

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

CONTINGENCY LEARNING AND RESPONSE PREDICTION

REANALYSIS
Incongruent
Congruent

700

650

600

550
High

Medium

Low

Contingency

Figure 2. Bottom: mean response latencies in milliseconds from Jacoby,
Lindsay, and Hessels (2003) for congruent and incongruent trials with
high, medium, and low contingencies. Top: original organization of the
data.

517

.033, ␩2p ⫽ .204, and a main effect for Stroop trial type, F(1, 15) ⫽
35.235, MSE ⫽ 4,902, p ⬍ .001, ␩2p ⫽ .701. Critically, and as
predicted, no interaction was observed between contingency and
Stroop trial type, F(2, 30) ⫽ .284, MSE ⫽ 668, p ⫽ .755, ␩2p ⫽
.019. Although Type II error is always a concern when interpreting
a null finding, the measure of effect size (␩2p) indicates that the
interaction term explains less than 2% of the variance in the
results,1 thus reinforcing the claim that this is a true null (or at least
very small) interaction.
Congruent and incongruent trials for each contingency level
were then averaged and planned comparisons were conducted to
test the hypothesis that the entire contingency effect is driven by
response facilitation on high contingency trials. As expected, there
was a significant 24 ms advantage for high contingency trials (609
ms) relative to medium (chance) contingency trials (636), t(15) ⫽
2.293, SEdiff ⫽ 11, p ⫽ .036, ␩2p ⫽ .260. The 1 ms numerical
difference between medium contingency (636) and low contingency trials (635) was not significant, t(15) ⫽ 0.180, SEdiff ⫽ 10,
p ⫽ .859, ␩2p ⫽ .002.

Discussion
The results of this reanalysis confirm the two hypotheses that
follow from the version of the contingency hypothesis assumed
here. First, the contingency effect and the Stroop effect (the
difference between congruent and incongruent trials) act separately, in that these factors produce no interaction. Second, as
predicted by the response threshold model, the contingency effect
is entirely facilitative for response latencies. As discussed in the
introduction, these findings provide further empirical support for
this version of the contingency hypothesis, which holds that participants use distracter words to predict particular responses,
thereby shortcutting some processing when this prediction is successful (high contingency trials) relative to when response prediction is unsuccessful (low contingency trials) or not attempted
(medium contingency trials).
These findings undermine the modulation hypothesis, which
asserts that participants modulate attention to the word on the basis
of the proportion congruency of the distracter words. Of particular
importance, if it is assumed that participants increase attention to
the word on high proportion congruent trials, then not only should
congruent trials (high contingency) be speeded relative to the
chance condition due to increased facilitation (observed), but incongruent trials (low contingency) should be slowed relative to the
chance condition due to increased interference (which was not
observed). Similarly, if participants suppress the word on low
proportion congruent trials, then not only should incongruent trials
(high contingency) be speeded relative to the chance condition due
to decreased interference (observed), but congruent trials (low
contingency) should be slowed relative to the chance condition due
to decreased facilitation (which was not observed). Further, because interference is substantially larger than facilitation in the
Stroop task, incongruent trials should have been more influenced
by attention than congruent trials, resulting in an interaction between contingency and Stroop trial type (which was also not
1
Note that even a true random factor will explain some proportion of
variance with a partial eta squared (␩2p) due to maximization on random
error. This is true of all measures of effect size, such as R squared (R2).

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

518

SCHMIDT AND BESNER

observed). Thus, these data support the contingency hypothesis,
but are in important ways inconsistent with the modulation hypothesis.
Consistent with our findings, Logan, Zbrodoff, and Williamson
(1984; Experiment 3) reported a null interaction between contingency and Stroop trial type for a four-choice Stroop task with a
standard experiment-wide proportion congruent manipulation. In
that experiment, the difference in response latencies between high
and low contingency congruent trials was the same as the difference between high and low contingency incongruent trials. Logan
et al. also reported a pair of two-choice experiments (Experiments
1 and 2) in which an interaction between contingency and Stroop
trial type was observed. This could be regarded as a potential
problem for the contingency hypothesis described here. However,
it is important to note that experiment-wide proportion congruency
manipulations (two-choice especially) are subject to confounding
sequential effects (i.e., trial-to-trial modulations of word reading).
For instance, if the word on the previous trial was congruent, then
the Stroop effect will be larger on the current trial (probably due to
increased attention to the word; Gratton, Coles, & Donchin, 1992;
see Schmidt et al., 2007, for a similar finding regarding sequential
contingency effects). Given that more trials are preceded by a
congruent trial in a high proportion congruent block than in a low
proportion congruent block, it would seem that simple proportion
congruency experiments are ill suited to test the present hypotheses.2 The ISPC paradigm used here, on the other hand, is able to
rule out the sequential trial confounds, because each trial type is
preceded by the same proportion of every type of trial (i.e., there
are no systematic sequential confounds).

Reanalysis 2: Jacoby et al. (2003) Percentage Error
The above reanalysis of the response latency data demonstrates
that when the proportion of congruent items is manipulated, the
resultant variations in the size of the Stroop effect can be explained
by a confound between contingencies and proportion congruency
condition. Specifically, in the high and low proportion congruency
conditions, congruent and incongruent trials are not matched for
contingencies (as explained in the introduction). In the current
section, we expand on the contingency hypothesis used to generate
the predictions for the first analysis and test some novel predictions that fall out of this account. In particular, whereas the
response threshold mechanism described earlier predicts only facilitation in response latencies, it predicts both facilitation and
interference in errors. The reason that facilitation is predicted on
high contingency trials for errors is the same as that for response
times: The threshold for the correct (predicted) response is lower.
Consequently, it takes less time to make a correct response, and it
is highly unlikely that participants will make another (incorrect)
response because of the relatively lower threshold for the correct
response compared to the incorrect responses.
However, unlike for latencies, where no response interference
was expected, response interference is predicted for errors because
the threshold for one of the competing (incorrect) responses is
lowered relative to the correct response and to the other incorrect
responses. For instance, for the stimulus BLUEgreen (where BLUE
is presented most often in blue), the threshold for the “blue”
response is lowered. However, the “blue” response is not the
correct response. Thus, there is an increased probability that par-

ticipants will make an error and select this predicted incorrect
response (“blue”) over the unpredicted correct response (“green”).

Method
There were 16 participants in Jacoby et al.’s (2003) Experiment
2B. This experiment was identical in all respects to Experiment
2A, except that participants had only 550 ms (rather than 2,000 ms
as in Experiment 1) to respond. This deadline procedure increases
the number of errors, which increases the power to detect effects
in the error data. For the purpose of these analyses, the means for
congruent and incongruent trials in Jacoby et al.’s Experiment 2B
were rearranged as a function of word-response contingency: high
(.75), medium (.50), and low (.25).

Results
The percentage error data (along with the original organization
of the data) are presented in Figure 3. Overall, error rates were
high (.14 –.61), reflecting the difficulty of producing a correct
response before the 550-ms deadline. A 3 (contingency: high,
medium, low) ⫻ 2 (Stroop trial type: congruent, incongruent)
ANOVA for percentage error revealed a main effect for contingency, F(2, 30) ⫽ 8.827, MSE ⫽ 0.8, p ⬍ .001, ␩2p ⫽ .233, and a
main effect for Stroop trial type, F(1, 15) ⫽ 114.481, MSE ⫽ 2.9,
p ⬍ .001, ␩2p ⫽ .798. As predicted, no interaction was observed
between contingency and Stroop trial type, F(2, 30) ⫽ 0.126,
MSE ⫽ 0.8, p ⫽ .882, ␩2p ⫽ .004. Again, the effect size measure
(␩2p) suggests that this is a true null (or at least very small)
interaction, explaining less than 1% of the variance in the results.
Congruent and incongruent trials for each contingency level
were then averaged, and planned comparisons were conducted to
test the hypothesis that the contingency effect has both a facilitative effect on high contingency trials and an interfering effect on
low contingency trials. As expected, there was a significant 4.4%
advantage for high contingency trials (32.3%) relative to medium
(chance) contingency trials (36.6%), t(15) ⫽ 1.854, SEdiff ⫽ 2.4,
p ⫽ .042 (one-tailed), ␩2p ⫽ .106, and a significant 5.2% disadvantage for low contingency trials (41.9%) relative to medium
contingency trials, t(15) ⫽ 2.315, SEdiff ⫽ 2.3, p ⫽ .035, ␩2p ⫽
.156.

Discussion
The results of the second reanalysis provide further support for
the response threshold mechanism of the contingency hypothesis.
Specifically, whereas only facilitation was observed in response
latencies, both facilitation on high contingency trials and interference on low contingency trials were observed in the error data. It
is atypical for an account to make differential predictions for
response latencies and errors, so the present findings constitute
strong and consistent support for the contingency hypothesis. The
experiments that follow test even more fine-grained hypotheses
generated from the contingency hypothesis.
2

The issue of sequential trial confounds can become even more complicated given that all congruent trials have high contingencies and all
incongruent trials have low contingencies in the high proportion congruent
block, whereas the reverse is true in the low proportion congruent block.

CONTINGENCY LEARNING AND RESPONSE PREDICTION

100

ORIGINAL ANALYSIS
Incongruent
Congruent

Error Percentage

80
60
40
20
0
Medium

Low

Proportion Congruency

100

REANALYSIS
Incongruent
Congruent

80
Error Percentage

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

High

60
40
20
0
High

Medium

Low

Contingency

Figure 3. Bottom: error percentages from Jacoby, Lindsay, and Hessels
(2003) for congruent and incongruent trials with high, medium, and low
contingencies. Top: original organization of the data.

Experiment 1
The contingency hypothesis presented here holds that participants implicitly learn contingencies and implicitly use them to aid
responding. Further, we proposed a mechanism whereby participants use contingency information to reduce the response threshold for the predicted response. This account predicts facilitation
with no corresponding interference when response latency is the
dependent variable but both facilitation and interference when
errors are the dependent variable. Both of these predictions were
borne out. Further, contingency effects operate separately from the
Stroop effect, a finding supported by the null interaction between
contingency and Stroop trial type. To further test the contingency
hypothesis, in Experiments 1 and 2 we investigate contingency
effects in the contingency learning paradigm developed by
Schmidt et al. (2007) using color-unrelated words.
It could be argued that the size of the Stroop effect is only
incidentally equivalent in the high, medium, and low contingency
conditions. It could also be claimed that the failure to find increased interference in the high proportion congruent condition
and decreased facilitation in the low proportion congruent condition is merely a Type II error. But the modulation hypothesis rests
on the critical assumption that the reason for variations in the size

519

of the Stroop effect is that participants detect the proportion of
congruent items. The contingency hypothesis, on the other hand,
makes no such claim. According to the contingency hypothesis,
words and responses merely have to be correlated; color-related
words are not necessary to observe contingency effects.
In that vein, Schmidt et al. (2007; see also Musen & Squire,
1993) have reported several experiments that provide further support for the contingency hypothesis interpretation of the ISPC
effect by showing that contingency effects can be observed in the
absence of a Stroop effect. In their experiments, color-unrelated
words (e.g., MOVE) were presented most often in a given color
(e.g., MOVE 75% of the time in blue, SENT 75% of the time in
green, etc.). Key press responses were faster to high contingency
trials (e.g., MOVE blue ) than low contingency trials (e.g.,
MOVEgreen). Thus, the results of these experiments confirm that
participants are able to use words (even when they are colorunrelated) to predict what response to make. This is a critical
result, because the modulation hypothesis cannot accommodate
these findings given that the words and colors have no congruency
relation that can be used to decide whether or not to attend to the
word.
Experiments 1 and 2 use the Schmidt et al. (2007) paradigm to
demonstrate contingency effects in the absence of any congruency
relations. These experiments include a medium contingency condition (not used by Schmidt et al.) to demonstrate a facilitationonly pattern in the response latencies (Experiment 1) and facilitation and interference in errors (Experiment 2) to mirror the main
effects observed in our reanalyses of Jacoby et al. (2003).
Experiment 1 was a two-choice, rather than a four-choice, task
(in part to ensure that the interactions observed by Logan et al.,
1984, were not attributable to something more than sequential
confounds). In Experiment 1, several color-unrelated words were
presented most often in a randomly assigned color. For instance,
SEVEN might be presented 75% percent of the time in blue and
25% of the time in green. Other words, for instance CHAIR, were
presented in blue and green equally often. This type of manipulation creates high contingency (.75; e.g., SEVENblue), medium
contingency (.50; e.g., CHAIRblue), and low contingency (.25; e.g.,
SEVENgreen) trials. Experiment 1 focuses primarily on response
latencies, with the goal of replicating the facilitation-only pattern
of results observed in Reanalysis 1.
Experiment 2 uses the response deadline procedure used by
Jacoby et al. (2003), in which participants are given a very short
amount of time to respond so as to maximize errors, and thus the
analysis focuses on the error data. Experiment 2 attempts to
replicate the findings observed in Reanalysis 2 and tests new
predictions from the response threshold model. In both experiments, the responses are manual (i.e., key press) rather than verbal.

Method
Participants. Thirty-four University of Waterloo undergraduates participated in Experiment 1 in exchange for course credit.
Apparatus. All stimuli were presented on a standard computer
monitor and responses were made on a QWERTY keyboard.
Participants pressed the F key for “blue” and the J key for “green.”
Stimulus presentation and response timing were controlled by
E-Prime software (Psychology Software Tools, 2002).

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

520

SCHMIDT AND BESNER

Materials and design.
There were three display words
(SEVEN, GLIDE, CHAIR) and two display colors (blue, green) in
the experiment. The words were selected to be of the same length.
For each participant, one of the words (e.g., SEVEN) was presented
most often (three out of four times per block) in blue, another word
(e.g., GLIDE) was presented most often (three out of four times per
block) in green, and the final word (e.g., CHAIR) was presented
equally often (twice each per block) in blue and green. Assignment
of words to colors was counterbalanced across participants. Words
were presented in bold 18-point Courier New font. The RGB
values for the stimulus colors were 0,0,255 (blue) and 0,255,0
(green). There were three contingency levels in the experiment:
high (.75; e.g., SEVENblue), medium (.50; e.g., CHAIRblue), and
low (.25; GLIDEblue).
Procedure. There were 420 trials in this experiment, consisting of 35 blocks of 12 trials each. On each trial, a white
(255,255,255) fixation cross (i.e., “⫹”) was presented in the middle of a black screen for 250 ms. This was followed by 250 ms of
blank screen, followed by the stimulus display. The stimulus
display was presented until a response was made or until the trial
timed out at 2,000 ms. Correct responses were followed by a blank
screen for 250 ms before the next fixation cross. Incorrect and null
responses were followed by the messages Incorrect and Too Slow,
respectively, for 1,000 ms in red (255,0,0).

Results
The dependent measures for Experiment 1 were mean correct
response latencies and percentage errors. All responses shorter
than 250 ms or longer than the response deadline were considered
spoiled trials and were excluded from analysis (less than 0.2% of
the trials).
The mean correct response latencies for Experiment 1 are presented in Figure 4. A one-way ANOVA on contingency (high,
medium, low) for response latencies was significant, F(2, 66) ⫽
3.902, MSE ⫽ 162, p ⫽ .025, ␩2p ⫽ .106. As expected, planned
comparisons revealed that responses for high contingency trials
(437 ms) were faster than for medium contingency trials (444 ms),
t(33) ⫽ 3.223, SEdiff ⫽ 2.1, p ⫽ .003, ␩2p ⫽ .239. Also as
predicted, no difference was observed between medium (444 ms)
and low contingency (445 ms) trials, t(33) ⫽ 0.395, SEdiff ⫽ 3.4,
p ⫽ .696, ␩2p ⫽ .005. For this latter comparison, there was high
power (.8) to detect an effect as small as 6 ms.

Errors were infrequent in Experiment 1, as shown in Figure 4.
An ANOVA on contingency (high, medium, low) for error percentages was significant, F(2, 66) ⫽ 3.987, MSE ⬍ 0.1, p ⫽ .023,
␩2p ⫽ .108. Although the means were numerically in the expected
direction, there were no significant differences between high
(4.4%) and medium contingency trials (5.2%), t(33) ⫽ 1.763,
SEdiff ⫽ 0.5, p ⫽ .087, ␩2p ⫽ .086, or between medium (5.2%) and
low contingency trials (5.7%), t(33) ⫽ 0.941, SEdiff ⫽ 0.5, p ⫽
.353, ␩2p ⫽ .026.

Discussion
Experiment 1 successfully replicated the finding of response
facilitation for high contingency trials coupled with no response
interference for low contingency trials relative to medium (chance)
contingency trials in a task with color-unrelated words. This provides further support for the claim that the “proportion congruent”
effect is in fact not due to modulations in the Stroop effect via
congruency, but is instead due to a confounding of Stroop conditions and contingency.

Experiment 2
Experiment 2 investigated whether the same pattern of facilitation and interference in errors observed in the ISPC task would be
seen with a simple contingency task. In addition, Experiment 2
tested a novel prediction from the contingency hypothesis. The
argument for the presence of response interference on low contingency trials for errors is that because the threshold for the (incorrect) predicted response is lowered, participants will be more likely
to erroneously select this predicted response rather than the correct
response for the color. For instance, for the stimulus MEETgreen,
where MEET is presented most often in blue, participants will
predict a blue key response based on the word. This will result in
the threshold for the “blue” response being lowered and will
therefore increase participants’ tendency to incorrectly make this
response (i.e., because lowering a response threshold can be likened to loosening the trigger for this response to fire). An observation of response interference in errors supports the notion of a
response threshold mechanism, but this account further predicts
that the inflation of errors in the low contingency condition is due
solely to an increase in the specific predicted response rather than
a general increase in errors. For instance, in a four-choice task, we
should expect increased blue key errors for the stimulus MEETgreen,
but no increased yellow or orange key errors. Although yellow and
orange would also be incorrect responses, they are not the predicted incorrect response. Thus, it should be expected that more
than a chance number of errors in the low contingency condition
(33% of incorrect responses) should be the predicted response.
Moreover, after correcting for this inflation of errors for the
predicted response, we should no longer observe response interference.

Method
Figure 4. Experiment 1 mean response latencies in milliseconds for high,
medium, and low contingency trials. Error percentages are in parentheses.

Participants. Ninety-five University of Waterloo undergraduates participated in Experiment 2 in exchange for course credit.
None had participated in Experiment 1.

Apparatus. The apparatus for Experiment 2 was identical in
all respects to Experiment 1, with one exception. Experiment 2
was a four-choice task (which was necessary to test the hypotheses
regarding predicted versus unpredicted errors); participants
pressed the A key for blue, the Z key for green, the M key for
yellow, and the K key for orange.
Materials and design. The materials and design for Experiment 2 were identical to Experiment 1, with the following exceptions. There were six new display words (LOOP, FINS, MEET,
SLID, CALL, TUBE) and four display colors (blue, green, yellow,
orange). For each participant, one of the words was presented most
often (6 out of 12 times per block) in blue, another most often in
green, another most often in yellow, and another most often in
orange. These words were presented equally often in the remaining
colors. The remaining two words were presented equally often (3
times each per block) in all colors. Assignment of words to colors
was counterbalanced across participants. The RGB values for the
new stimulus colors were 255,255,0 (yellow) and 255,125,0 (orange). There were three contingency levels in the experiment: high
(.50), medium (.25), and low (.17).
Procedure. The procedure was identical in all respects to
Experiment 1, with the following exceptions. There were 432 trials
in this experiment, consisting of six blocks of 72 trials each. To
increase error frequency, we instructed participants to respond
before a 550-ms deadline when the stimulus display terminated. To
avoid discouraging errors, we set the 1,000-ms “penalty duration”
used in Experiment 1 only for the Too Slow message for null
responses, whereas we set the Incorrect message for errors to the
250-ms duration used on correct trials.

521

due to difficulty learning contingencies with such a brief response
window. A one-way ANOVA on contingency (high, medium, low)
for errors was significant, F(2, 188) ⫽ 12.068, MSE ⫽ 0.3, p ⬍
.001, ␩2p ⫽ .114. As expected, planned comparisons revealed that
high contingency trials (27.7%) generated fewer errors than medium contingency trials (30.1%), t(94) ⫽ 2.890, SEdiff ⫽ 0.8, p ⫽
.005, ␩2p ⫽ .082, and low contingency trials (31.4%) generated
more errors than medium contingency trials, t(94) ⫽ 1.929,
SEdiff ⫽ 0.7, p ⫽ .028 (one-tailed), ␩2p ⫽ .038.
Critically, we also assessed the hypothesis that this increase in
errors for low contingency trials was due to an increase in the
(incorrect) predicted response and found that the 36.4% errors for
the predicted response was significantly greater than chance
(33.3%), t(94) ⫽ 2.800, SE ⫽ 1.1, p ⫽ .006, ␩2p ⫽ .077. We then
tested the assumption that the interference observed for low contingency trials would be eliminated by removing the extra predicted errors. To do this, we calculated a fourth condition (shown
in Figure 5), low contingency adjusted, that consists of the error
frequency of only the nonpredicted responses adjusted to the same
scale as the other trial types. This was done with the formula: (low
contingency) ⫻ (percentage unpredicted errors) ⫻ (3/2). As predicted, the resulting low contingency adjusted condition showed
significantly fewer errors (30.0%) than the unadjusted low contingency condition (31.4%), t(94) ⫽ 3.036, SEdiff ⫽ 0.4, p ⫽ .003,
␩2p ⫽ .089, and no difference in errors compared to medium
contingency trials (30.1%), t(94) ⫽ 0.113, SEdiff ⫽ 0.7, p ⫽ .910,
␩2p ⬍ .001. For this last comparison, there was sufficiently high
power (.8) to detect an effect as small as 2%.

Discussion
Results
The dependent measure for Experiment 2 was percentage errors.
Responses not made within the response deadline were considered
spoiled trials and were excluded from analysis (approximately
20% of the data, reflecting the difficulty of this task).
The error percentages for Experiment 2 are presented in Figure
5. To broadly characterize the data, although we were able to
induce an adequately high rate of errors, contingency effects were
small in this experiment. This may have been due to the relatively
weaker contingency manipulation (.17–.50 rather than .25–.75) or

Experiment 2 replicated the findings of facilitation and interference in errors observed in Reanalysis 2. Additionally, these analyses support the prediction of the contingency hypothesis that the
interference effect in errors is due solely to the increase in errors
for the predicted response: Participants made more of the predicted
errors than expected by chance, and when this increase was controlled for there was no difference in errors for medium and low
contingency trials. This is inconsistent with any version of the
modulation hypothesis that we can think of and provides further
support for the notion that participants use the contingencies
between words and responses to reduce the response threshold for
the predicted response.

34

General Discussion
Error Percentage

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

CONTINGENCY LEARNING AND RESPONSE PREDICTION

32

30

28

26
High

Medium

Low

Low Adjusted

Contingency

Figure 5. Experiment 2 error percentages for high, medium, and low
contingency trials.

Two new analyses of the data from Jacoby et al.’s (2003)
experiments along with the results of two new experiments converge with the results of other recent investigations (e.g., Schmidt
et al., 2007) to confirm a simple contingency account of the ISPC
effect (and probably the majority of the proportion congruent
effect). When Stroop effects are analyzed as a function of the
predictability of the words (i.e., contingency), Stroop trial type
(congruent, incongruent) does not interact with contingency in
either response time or error data. This finding confirms the view
that the entire ISPC effect (i.e., the highly replicated interaction
between proportion congruency and Stroop trial type) can be
accounted for by a main effect of Stroop trial type and a main
effect of contingency.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

522

SCHMIDT AND BESNER

Reanalysis 1 and Experiment 1 also demonstrated that contingency effects are solely facilitative in response times. That is, high
contingency trials are speeded relative to medium (chance) contingency trials, but there is no disadvantage for low contingency
trials relative to medium contingency. These results are inconsistent with the modulation hypothesis, but are entirely as predicted
by the contingency hypothesis. According to the contingency
hypothesis, response time facilitation occurs because participants
are able to successfully predict the correct response based on the
word on these trials and shortcut processing by reducing the
response threshold for the predicted response. This same mechanism further predicts facilitation for high contingency trials and
interference for low contingency trials in errors. These predicted
results for errors were observed in Reanalysis 2 of Jacoby et al.’s
(2003) data, as well as in Experiment 2. Error facilitation is
predicted according to this account because the threshold for the
correct response is lowered when it is predictable (i.e., on high
contingency trials), and it is therefore less likely that participants
will make any other response. Error interference is also predicted,
because the response threshold for one of the incorrect responses
is lowered when it is predictable (i.e., on low contingency trials),
and it is therefore more likely that participants will make this
particular error. Further analyses in Experiment 2 confirmed that
the increase in errors in the low contingency condition is due
solely to the increase in the specific predicted incorrect response.

Conflict Monitoring
These findings have important implications for the conflict
monitoring framework of Botvinick, Braver, Barch, Carter, and
Cohen (2001). Botvinick et al. propose that many of the effects
observed in Stroop and Stroop-like paradigms can be explained by
a conflict monitoring mechanism thought to lie in the anterior
cingulate cortex. According to their account, the anterior cingulate
cortex detects conflict when it occurs (e.g., when a word and
display color indicate two different potential responses). After
detecting conflict, attention is more stringently focused on the
target. Through simulation work, Botvinick et al. have demonstrated that conflict monitoring can explain sequential Stroop
effects (because attention to the target is increased following an
incongruent trial) and the standard proportion congruent effect
(because the greater number of incongruent trials in the low
proportion congruent condition leads to more attention to the target
dimension of color block-wide).
Clearly, the conflict monitoring account of the proportion congruent effect is a variant of the modulation hypothesis and suffers
from the same shortcomings. In particular, the modulation hypothesis is unable to explain the ISPC effect, because the amount of
conflict experienced prior to high and low proportion congruent
trials is the same (i.e., because they are mixed within the same
block). However, Blais, Robidoux, Risko, and Besner (2007) have
presented a variant of the conflict monitoring account in which
conflict is monitored separately for each item. For instance, each
time YELLOW is presented as the distracter word, the level of
conflict will be monitored. If YELLOW is presented most often in
an incongruent color, then overall conflict will be high. As such,
when YELLOW is again encountered, attention to the color will be
highly focused, thus minimizing the impact of the word on performance. However, within the same block, BLUE may be pre-

sented most often in its congruent color, resulting in low overall
conflict for this word. As such, when the word BLUE is presented,
attention to the color will not be as focused, thus allowing the word
to impact performance relatively more. Blais et al.’s variant of the
conflict monitoring account can therefore explain the variations in
the size of the Stroop effect when the proportion of congruent
items is manipulated across items. But Blais et al.’s account
simulates only the interaction between proportion congruency and
Stroop trial type, and not the various other characteristics of the
data (e.g., the fact that the effect is driven by the speeding of
congruent trials in the high proportion congruent condition and
incongruent trials in the low proportion congruent condition).
More critically, their account cannot explain why contingency
effects are still observed with color-unrelated words: There is
simply no differential conflict to monitor between the various
conditions.
Another way the conflict monitoring model could be altered in
an attempt to explain the ISPC effect is to turn learning back on
and allow the system to learn contingencies by forming stimulus–
response associations between words and colors. However, this
change in the conflict monitoring model will still fail to simulate
many of the results presented here. In particular, such a model
would produce interference on low contingency trials in the response latencies, because the distracting word would activate an
incorrect response (the “predicted” response), which would compete with the correct response. For that matter, we see no way for
this version of the conflict monitoring hypothesis to return qualitatively different results for response times and errors.
In summary, although the conflict monitoring model of Botvinick et al. (2001) provides a compelling explanation for sequential
Stroop effects (which undoubtedly contribute to the simple proportion congruent effect), the weight of the evidence to date
suggests that the ISPC effect is better explained by contingency
learning. Further, although sequential (Trial n ⫺1) effects contribute to the simple proportion congruent effect, it is our suggestion
that the remainder (and bulk) of the effect is explained by contingency.

Implications for Future Stroop Research
These results, successfully predicted by the contingency hypothesis, illuminate an error in the currently received conceptualization
of proportion congruency manipulations. For instance, in the high
proportion congruent condition of a two-choice task, congruent
words with high contingencies (e.g., BLUEblue) are being compared to incongruent words with low contingencies (e.g.,
BLUEgreen). That is, words are 75% predictive of the correct
response in the congruent condition, but only 25% predictive of the
correct response in the incongruent condition. The reverse is true
in the low proportion congruent condition, where congruent words
with low contingencies (e.g., ORANGEorange) are being compared
to incongruent words with high contingencies (e.g., ORANGEyellow).
It is in this sense that Stroop effects (i.e., facilitation and interference resulting from conflict in meaning between related concepts)
are confounded with contingency effects (i.e., prediction of responses based on word-response correlations).
Given that the contingency hypothesis explanation of the proportion congruent effect appears sufficient, it would be prudent to
question the “purity” of all Stroop effects emerging from method-

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

CONTINGENCY LEARNING AND RESPONSE PREDICTION

ologies with nonchance contingencies. Algom and colleagues have
reached a similar conclusion (Dishon-Berkovits & Algom, 2000;
Melara & Algom, 2003; Sabri, Melara, & Algom, 2001). The main
methodological point is that, although nonchance contingencies
may “maximize” the size of the Stroop effect (and thus its detectability), the said Stroop effect measure is confounded with contingency effects. Thus, any data collected with such a design may
not be applicable to the standard effect with chance contingencies.
For instance, in a four-color Stroop task, each word should be
presented in each color 25% of the time (which is typically not the
case). Any deviation from such contingencies will necessarily
confound Stroop effects with contingency learning effects. This
methodological point applies to all paradigms in which contingency information may aid responding.

Conclusions
The results of two new analyses of work by Jacoby et al. (2003)
along with the results of two new experiments disconfirm the
generally accepted and intuitively appealing modulation hypothesis, which explains the proportion congruent effect in terms of
control over attention allocated to processing the word. On the
other hand, these analyses provide consistent support for the contingency hypothesis, which explains the proportion congruent effect in terms of the predictability of words (i.e., contingency).
Specifically, the results are consistent with the proposed response
mechanism in which participants decrease the threshold for the
expected (high contingency) response. Of particular note, the
contingency hypothesis successfully predicted differential results
for response latencies and error rates.
Confirmation of the contingency hypothesis will likely be associated with both frustration and excitement by researchers in
cognitive psychology. The results may seem frustrating because
they disconfirm the highly appealing modulation hypothesis and
consequently bring into question the proper interpretation of the
experiments that have made use of the paradigm over the last 25
years. On the other hand, these same results can be seen as exciting
because they demonstrate the processing power, speed, and control
of implicit processes.

References
Blais, C., Robidoux, S., Risko, E. F., & Besner, D. (2007). Item specific
adaptation and the conflict monitoring hypothesis: A computational
model. Psychological Review, 114, 1076 –1086.
Botvinick, M. M., Braver, T. S., Barch, D. M., Carter, C. S., & Cohen, J. D.
(2001). Conflict monitoring and cognitive control. Psychological Review, 108, 624 – 652.

523

Cheesman, J., & Merikle, P. M. (1986). Distinguishing conscious from
unconscious perceptual processes. Canadian Journal of Psychology, 40,
343–367.
Dishon-Berkovits, M., & Algom, D. (2000). The Stroop effect: It is not the
robust phenomenon that you have thought it to be. Memory & Cognition,
28, 1437–1449.
Gratton, G., Coles, M. G. H., & Donchin, E. (1992). Optimizing the use of
information: Strategic control of activation of responses. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 121, 480 –506.
Jacoby, L. L., Lindsay, D. S., & Hessels, S. (2003). Item-specific control
of automatic processes: Stroop process dissociations. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 10, 634 – 644.
Lindsay, D. S., & Jacoby, L. L. (1994). Stroop process dissociations: The
relationship between facilitation and interference. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 20, 219 –234.
Logan, G. D., Zbrodoff, N. J., & Williamson, J. (1984). Strategies in the
color–word Stroop task. Bulletin of the Psychonomic Society, 22, 135–
138.
Lowe, D. G., & Mitterer, J. O. (1982). Selective and divided attention in a
Stroop task. Canadian Journal of Psychology, 36, 684 –700.
MacLeod, C. M. (1991). Half a century of research on the Stroop effect: An
integrative review. Psychological Bulletin, 109, 163–203.
Melara, R. D., & Algom, D. (2003). Driven by information: A tectonic
theory of Stroop effects. Psychological Review, 110, 422– 471.
Musen, G., & Squire, L. R. (1993). Implicit learning of color–word
associations using a Stroop paradigm. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 19, 789 –798.
Psychology Software Tools. (2002). E-Prime (Version 1.1) [Computer
software]. Available from http://www.pstnet.com/products/E-Prime/
default.htm
Rescorla, R. A., & Wagner, A. R. (1972). A theory of Pavlovian conditioning: Variations in the effectiveness of reinforcement and nonreinforcement. In A. H. Black & W. F. Prokasy (Eds.), Classical conditioning II: Current research and theory (pp. 64 –99). New York: Appleton–
Century–Crofts.
Sabri, M., Melara, R. D., & Algom, D. (2001). A confluence of contexts:
Asymmetric versus global failures of selective attention to Stroop dimensions. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance, 27, 515–537.
Schmidt, J. R., Crump, M. J. C., Cheesman, J., & Besner, D. (2007).
Contingency learning without awareness: Evidence for implicit control.
Consciousness and Cognition, 16, 421– 435.
Shanks, D. R. (2007). Associationism and cognition: Human contingency
learning at 25. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 60,
291–309.
Stroop, J. R. (1935). Studies of interference in serial verbal reactions.
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 18, 643– 662.

Received June 30, 2007
Revision received October 9, 2007
Accepted November 20, 2007 䡲

