PS YC HOLOGICA L SC IENCE

Research Article

Extremal Edges
A Powerful Cue to Depth Perception and Figure-Ground
Organization
Stephen E. Palmer1 and Tandra Ghose2
1

Psychology Department and 2Vision Science Program, University of California, Berkeley

ABSTRACT—Extremal

edges (EEs) are projections of viewpoint-speciﬁc horizons of self-occlusion on smooth convex
surfaces. An ecological analysis of viewpoint constraints
suggests that an EE surface is likely to be closer to the
observer than the non-EE surface on the other side of the
edge. In two experiments, one using shading gradients and
the other using texture gradients, we demonstrated that
EEs operate as strong cues to relative depth perception
and ﬁgure-ground organization. Image regions with an EE
along the shared border were overwhelmingly perceived
as closer than either ﬂat or equally convex surfaces without an EE along that border. A further demonstration suggests that EEs are more powerful than classical ﬁgureground cues, including even the joint effects of small size,
convexity, and surroundedness.
Observers often view natural scenes in which one opaque object
partly occludes another so that their retinal projections share an
image contour. Such situations raise a critical question for vision
science: Which region attached to the shared edge is perceived
as the closer, occluding ‘‘ﬁgure,’’ and which region is perceived
as the farther, partly occluded ‘‘ground’’? The observer’s choice
of ﬁgure and ground determines not only perceived depth relations, but also the perceived shape of the closer surface, objectidentiﬁcation processes, and other shape-based processing.
Rubin (1921/1958) is well known for demonstrating several
factors that bias perception toward seeing a given area as closer
and ﬁgural. These factors include surroundedness, small size,
higher contrast, and horizontal or vertical orientation. Since
Rubin, researchers have identiﬁed many additional factors,
including symmetry (Bahnsen, 1928), convexity (Kanizsa &
Gerbino, 1976; Metzger, 1936/2006), familiarity (Peterson &
Gibson, 1991, 1994), location in a lower region (Vecera, Vogel,

Address correspondence to Stephen E. Palmer, Department of
Psychology, University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, CA 947201650, e-mail: palmer@cogsci.berkeley.edu.

Volume 19—Number 1

& Woodman, 2002), wider base (Hulleman & Humphreys,
2004), and edge-region grouping (Palmer & Brooks, in press).
The present article discusses another potent factor in ﬁgureground perception: extremal edges (EEs).1
An EE is the projection of a viewpoint-speciﬁc horizon of selfocclusion on a smooth convex surface. An EE for a given object
from a speciﬁed viewpoint is deﬁned as the projection of the
subset of surface points whose sight lines from the viewpoint are
tangent to the surface (e.g., Barrow & Tennenbaum, 1978; Malik, 1987).2 Consider a person looking toward the side of a
cylinder, as in the plan view shown in Figure 1a. Figures 1b and
1c illustrate the EE images that result if the cylinder’s surface is
homogeneous gray and black-and-white checkered, respectively. Figures 1d through 1f show plan views of the three
qualitatively different depth relations that might hold between
the EE and non-EE surfaces. Consistent with Helmholtz’s (1867/
1925) likelihood principle, an ecological analysis of viewpoint
constraints suggests that the EE side is likely to be closer than
the non-EE side because that possibility is consistent with a
wider range of viewpoint locations (see also Huggins & Zucker,
2001a, 2001b). Situations in which the non-EE side is closer or
touching the EE are highly accidental. Therefore, if the visual

1
EEs have been used to produce ﬁgural biases, but we know of no prior
systematic psychophysical studies of the effects of EEs on ﬁgure-ground organization. Shepard (1990, p. 72) used shading EEs in an ambiguous ﬁgureground drawing titled ‘‘Beckoning Balusters,’’ and Diane Beck used them to
bias the ﬁgural side of ﬁgure-ground displays in an unpublished study in our
laboratory. Also, von der Heydt and Pierson (2006) discussed border ownership
in asymmetrical luminance proﬁles in the watercolor illusion (Pinna, Brelstaff,
& Spillmann, 2001) but did not explicitly discuss EEs.
2
Zucker and his colleagues (Huggins, Chen, Belhumeur, & Zucker, 2001;
Huggins & Zucker, 2001a, 2001b) have called EEs ‘‘folds,’’ following the nomenclature developed in topology. This label seems to apply more naturally to
situations in which gradient patterns deﬁne a depth edge between different
regions of the same surface, such as folds of cloth in curtains or a full skirt. We
prefer the EE terminology employed by Barrow and Tennenbaum (1978) in
discussing ﬁgure-ground issues because it applies to cases in which the edge in
question marks the bounding contour of the object on one side. Nevertheless, we
acknowledge that what we mean by EEs is the same as what Zucker means by
folds, and that EEs do not always correspond to object boundaries.

Copyright r 2008 Association for Psychological Science

77

Extremal Edges

Fig. 1. An ecological analysis of extremal edges (EEs) based on general viewpoint. The illustrations in (b) and
(c) show the EEs deﬁned by a shading gradient and texture gradient, respectively, for an observer viewing a
cylinder as shown in the plan view in (a); each EE is shown adjacent to a ﬂat surface with the same surface
properties. The plan views in the lower row illustrate that the EE side in these examples could be farther than
(d), closer than (e), or touching (f) the non-EE side. The gray circles represent the cylinder as seen from above,
and the solid line segments represent an adjacent ﬂat surface at different depths. The shaded regions in (e) and
(f) indicate the range of viewpoints from which the scene would project an EE image qualitatively like the ones
in (b) and (c). If the non-EE surface is closer than the EE surface (d), moving rightward causes the ﬂat surface
to occlude the EE and moving leftward produces a gap. If the EE surface is closer than the non-EE surface (e),
moving either way will preserve the EE along the shared contour. If the two surfaces touch (f), moving
rightward reduces to the case shown in (d), and moving leftward reduces to the case shown in (e). The viewing
area consistent with EE images is thus maximized if the EE side is closer than the non-EE side, and this implies
that perception should favor this outcome.

system can distinguish EEs from non-EEs, it should tend to
perceive the EE side as closer and ﬁgural.3
There is an important confound in Figures 1a and 1b, however.
Because image regions bounded by an EE are, by deﬁnition,
projections of convex 3-D surfaces, a preference to see them as
3
For clarity, we note that this is a different claim than is made in classical
shape-from-shading or shape-from-texture analyses (e.g., Horn, 1975; Malik &
Rosenholtz, 1994), which specify the relative distance to different points on a
single surface on the basis of the optical structure of projected images independently of general viewpoint considerations. We also note, however, that the
same considerations that apply to depth at EEs also apply to depth in a single
complex-curved surface in which smooth self-occlusion occurs, such as in a fold
of cloth. Zucker and his colleagues (e.g., Huggins et al., 2001; Huggins &
Zucker, 2001a, 2001b) have investigated the image-based determinants of EEs
in this latter context, referring to them as ‘‘folds’’ (on the EE side) and ‘‘cuts’’ (on
the non-EE side). Finally, we note that other researchers have previously employed generic viewpoint arguments to explain other aspects of visual perception, such as stereoscopic depth (e.g., Koenderink & van Doorn, 1976),
pictorial depth (e.g., Nakayama & Shimojo, 1992), shape from shading (e.g.,
Freeman, 1996), and ﬁgure-ground assignment (e.g., Palmer, 1999).

78

closer might simply reﬂect a bias toward perceiving convex
surfaces as closer. A bias toward seeing regions bounded by
convex 2-D edges as closer and ﬁgural is well-known (Kanizsa &
Gerbino, 1976; Metzger, 1936/2006), and a corresponding bias
toward seeing convex 3-D surfaces as closer might be expected.
Most environmental surfaces are at least locally convex, and in
the absence of ecological statistics, the apparent ﬂatness of
canonical grounds (e.g., sky, ground planes, walls, and ﬂoors)
lends intuitive weight to this argument.
The confound between depth convexity and the presence of
EEs along shared contours can be eliminated, however, by
studying cases in which the surfaces on the two sides of the
critical edge are identical except for a 901 rotation that changes
the placement of the EEs (see Fig. 2, upper left image). If the EE
side is seen as closer, even when it is adjacent to an equally
convex non-EE region, then mere convexity cannot explain the
result.

Volume 19—Number 1

Stephen E. Palmer and Tandra Ghose

Fig. 2. Examples of the shading displays tested in Experiment 1. All nonidentical pairs of seven regions
were used in horizontally oriented displays (shown) and vertically oriented displays (not shown): a convex
region with an extremal edge along the shared edge (EE), an equally convex region with no extremal edge
along the shared edge (CNV), a textured region consisting of randomized strips of the EE region (RS), a
textured region containing randomly positioned black and white random dots (RD), and uniform gray
regions at 75% (H75), 50% (not shown), and 25% (not shown) of maximum luminance.

The two experiments we report here tested the inﬂuence of
EEs on the perception of relative depth and ﬁgure-ground organization across a straight edge. Experiment 1 examined the
perceptual effects of a simple luminance gradient (the positive
half of a sinusoid) that produces the perception of a matte cylinder (see Fig. 1b). Experiment 2 examined perceptual effects
using checkered texture gradients (see Fig. 1c). The results of
both experiments strongly support the ecological predictions
based on viewpoint constraints: EEs are a powerful factor in the
perception of relative depth and ﬁgure-ground organization
across a shared contour.
EXPERIMENT 1: EXTREMAL EDGES FROM SHADING
GRADIENTS

nance patterns as non-EE regions to control for possible confounds: homogeneous regions that controlled for differences in
mean luminance, textured regions that controlled for 2-D contrast structure, and convex non-EE regions that controlled for 3D convexity (see Fig. 2).
Method
Participants
Nine students at the University of California, Berkeley, volunteered to participate in exchange for partial course credit in an
undergraduate psychology course. All had normal or correctedto-normal vision.

Experiment 1 examined depth and ﬁgural perception for simple
bipartite displays that consisted of a central, straight contour
separating two equal-sized, square regions that were aligned
vertically or horizontally. In the conditions of primary interest,
one side contained an EE along the shared contour, and the other
side did not. The EE side always consisted of a luminance
gradient that was perpendicular to the central contour (i.e., a
gradient whose equiluminance contours were parallel to the
edge) and formed the positive half of a sinusoid (see Fig. 2, left
regions in the top row).4 We used three different kinds of lumi-

Apparatus
Displays were generated on a 15-in. Sony Vaio computer and
presented on its LCD screen (size 5 20.5 cm  33 cm, resolution 5 1280  800 pixels). Except for the displays on the
screen, the room was dark. The observer’s head was stabilized
using a chin rest, and the screen was perpendicular to the line of
sight. The size of the images, including a random-dot frame, was
10 cm  16 cm (101  161 at 57 cm). Presentation and response collection were controlled by a MATLAB program
(Mathworks Ltd., Cambridge, United Kingdom) using routines
from the Psychophysics Toolbox (Brainard, 1997).

4
Note that although such surfaces might theoretically be concave rather than
convex, concavity was virtually never perceived. Presumably, there is a strong
perceptual bias toward perceiving convexity over concavity because of the
ecological preponderance of convex surfaces in the natural environment.

Design
Simple bipartite displays were constructed using MATLAB. The
two parts of each display were constructed by joining two square

Volume 19—Number 1

79

Extremal Edges

regions (6.4 cm  6.4 cm) along a horizontal edge in the vertically oriented displays and along a vertical edge in the horizontally oriented displays. The luminance pattern of each
square region was one of the seven types (see Fig. 2): a convex
region with an EE along the shared edge, an equally convex
region with no EE along the shared edge, a textured region that
consisted of randomized strips of the EE display, a textured
region that contained randomly positioned black and white dots,
and uniform gray regions at 75%, 50%, and 25% of maximum
luminance. In both the horizontal and the vertical displays, we
paired all possible nonidentical combinations, including versions that were left-right and up-down reﬂections. All pairs were
surrounded by a rectangular random-noise ﬁeld measuring 10
cm  16 cm. The experiment had a fully within-subjects design
in which each participant saw four replications of each display.
Trials were blocked by display orientation (vertical vs. horizontal), but all other factors were randomly intermixed.

Procedure
The experiment was approved by the committee for the protection of human subjects at the University of California, Berkeley,
and informed consent was obtained from all participants. Participants were instructed to press the appropriate key on a
computer keyboard to indicate the side in each display that
appeared closer. The response mappings were the natural ones:
the left or right arrow key for horizontal displays and the up or
down arrow key for vertical displays. Participants were given 10
practice trials followed by four blocks of experimental trials and
were allowed to take a break after any trial.
Each trial began with the presentation of a 10-cm  16-cm
random-dot ﬁeld containing a large ﬁxation cross centered on a
50%-gray screen. The participant pressed a key to view the
target display, which was then presented for 2 s. The target
display was replaced by a random-dot ﬁeld containing a large
question mark, which prompted the participant to indicate
which region appeared closer and ﬁgural. The question mark
disappeared when the observer responded and was replaced by
the random-dot ﬁeld containing the large ﬁxation cross, which
indicated the start of the next trial.

Results and Discussion
We computed the percentage of trials on which participants
chose the side with a given luminance pattern, for each other
pattern with which it was combined. These data were averaged
over the four replications and analyzed for positional effects.
There was no bias toward left or right in the horizontal displays,
t(8) 5 1.21, p > .20, but the lower region was chosen more often
than the upper region in the vertical displays (60% vs. 40%), t(8)
5 2.79, p < .05, a ﬁnding consistent with the results of Vecera et
al. (2002). We averaged these data to eliminate positional effects
in subsequent analyses.

80

There were no signiﬁcant differences between the results for
the two kinds of textured regions (random strips and random
dots) or among the results for the three uniform gray regions. We
therefore averaged the data within each of these two categories.
The major ﬁndings are easily summarized: EEs produced a very
powerful bias toward seeing the EE side as closer and ﬁgural,
ts(8) 5 8.00, 5.82, and 8.01 for pairings with convex, textured,
and uniform regions, respectively, ps < .001. There also appeared to be a weak effect of 3-D convexity on depth perception:
Convex regions were seen as closer more often than were textured or uniform regions, but these effects barely approached
signiﬁcance, ts(8) 5 1.37 and 1.73, .05 < p < .10, one-tailed.
Texture also appeared to inﬂuence perceived depth, but the
advantage for textured regions over uniform regions was only
marginally reliable, t(8) 5 2.06, p < .05, one-tailed.
The fact that EE regions were reliably seen as closer than the
convexity-matched non-EE regions seems to indicate that EE
effects are not attributable to convexity alone. One possible
objection to this conclusion is that the shading gradient in the
non-EE convex region appears to be occluded because of a
gradient cut in which the central edge intersects the equiluminance contours of the gradient on the non-EE side. No gradient
cut is present on the EE side of the central edge because the
edge is parallel to the equiluminance contours of the EE gradient. The gradient cut on the non-EE side may therefore provide a depth cue indicating that the opposite (EE) side is closer
and ﬁgural for reasons unrelated to the presence of an EE along
the shared border.
In rebuttal, one could argue that the edges of the uniform and
textured regions also produced gradient cuts when these regions
were paired with convex regions. Thus, by the logic of the objection just mentioned, the uniform and textured regions should
have been perceived as reliably closer than the convex regions.
They were not. However, this rebuttal is open to the objection
that the observed bias toward perceiving uniform and textured
regions as farther could have been due to the effect of a gradient
cut being countered by a bias toward seeing the convex side as
closer because its convexity makes it appear to bulge toward the
observer. To address the issue of whether gradient cuts in the
non-EE regions could account for the pattern of results, we
performed a stepwise regression analysis that predicted the data
shown in Figure 3 from the difference between the left and right
sides in a given display in terms of presence (vs. absence) of
EEs, depth convexity, gradient cuts, and 2-D texture on the two
sides. The order in which the variables were entered, additional
percentage of variance accounted for, and corresponding F ratios were as follows—EE: 81%, F(1, 10) 5 41.62, p < .001;
depth convexity: 11%, F(1, 9) 5 11.82, p < .01; and texture:
5%, F(1, 8) 5 11.24, p < .01; no signiﬁcant further variance was
attributable to gradient cuts. This analysis yielded a multiple r of
.98, accounting for 97% of the variance. Unfortunately, this
result is not deﬁnitive because the presence versus absence of
an EE along the shared edge is fully predictable from the

Volume 19—Number 1

Stephen E. Palmer and Tandra Ghose

Fig. 3. Results of Experiment 1. Percentage of trials on which observers
chose each region indicated along the abscissa when it was paired with
each of the other regions (indicated by the shading of the bars). Data from
the textured conditions (random strips and random dots) have been averaged, and data from the uniform gray conditions (75%, 50%, and 25%
of maximum luminance) have been averaged. Asterisks indicate signiﬁcant deviations from chance (i.e., the dashed line at 50%), p < .001. EE
5 region with an extremal edge.

combination of depth convexity and gradient cuts in this set of
displays. We therefore revisited the issue of gradient cuts in
Experiment 2, in which additional constraints were present.
Another argument against concluding that the EE along the
central contour caused the large bias toward seeing the EE side
as closer is that the EE side always contained a second EE along
its far border. It is logically possible, although highly unlikely,
that this second EE was somehow crucial in producing the bias
toward seeing the EE side as closer in Experiment 1. Experiment 2 also addressed this issue.
EXPERIMENT 2: EXTREMAL EDGES FROM TEXTURE
GRADIENTS

The ecological analysis of depth from EEs provided in Figure 1
concerns the relative distance of two surfaces that project to a
shared depth edge, one side of which arises from a self-occluding convex surface and the other side of which does not.
Because the general-viewpoint argument concerns only scene
geometry and not the optical information that speciﬁes the
presence of EEs, the bias toward perceiving EE surfaces as
closer should hold regardless of what visual property speciﬁes
the EEs. Therefore, in Experiment 2, we explored depth and
ﬁgural perception when EEs were rendered by texture gradients.
Our primary motivation was to determine whether texture also
produces a strong bias toward perceiving EE regions as closer.
Using POVRAY software (freeware available at www.povray.
org), we constructed ray-traced images of surfaces deﬁned by
checkered textures. The ﬁve surface types are illustrated in
Figure 4 along with a single example of a display formed when

Volume 19—Number 1

two such regions are joined along the shared edge. To ensure that
size cues did not favor the EE region, we made the square checks
on the ﬂat regions the same size as the largest checks on the EE
and convex regions, and thus substantially larger than the
smaller checks along the EEs. To minimize any occlusion cues to
depth, we aligned the texture elements along the central contour
so that the edges of the individual texture elements of the nonEE region fell along the straight line of the contour and there was
no partial occlusion of texture elements. We included quartercylinder regions that contained a single EE (i.e., along the
shared contour) so that we could examine possible effects of the
second EE in the half-cylinder conditions of Experiment 1. The
experimental question was whether, as predicted by the ecological analysis, the EE regions in both the quarter-cylinder and
the half-cylinder textured displays used in Experiment 2 would
be reliably seen as ﬁgural and closer than the corresponding
non-EE convex regions, as well as the ﬂat regions.
Method
Participants
Eight students at the University of California, Berkeley, participated in exchange for partial course credit in an undergraduate
psychology course. All had normal or corrected-to-normal vision.
Apparatus
The displays were presented on the same Sony Vaio computer
under the same conditions as in Experiment 1.
Design
We used POVRAY, an open-source ray-tracing program, to
construct displays similar to those in Experiment 1, but with the
surfaces rendered using texture instead of shading. By cropping
along the median plane, we eliminated partly occluded square
texture elements along the shared contour, thus ensuring that
occlusion was not a factor in depth perception across the edge
(see Fig. 4). We used four different checkerboard patterns: redblack, green-black, white-black, and white-gray (the gray was
10% of maximum luminance). In these bipartite displays, redblack and green-black regions were paired, as were white-black
and white-gray regions. Within this constraint, we paired all
possible nonidentical combinations, including versions that
were left-right reversals and check-pattern reversals (i.e., displays in which the color or the contrast of the checks was reversed in the left and right images). The pairs were displayed on
a uniform 50%-gray background. The experiment had a fully
within-subjects design, in which each participant was presented
with three replications of each of the displays.
Procedure
The experiment was approved by the committee for the protection of human subjects at the University of California, Berkeley,
and informed consent was obtained from all participants. Par-

81

Extremal Edges

Fig. 4. Textured regions used in Experiment 2 and a sample display. All
nonidentical pairings of ﬁve checkered regions were used: a half-cylinder
with two extremal edges (EEs), one of which was along the shared border
(EE2); a quarter-cylinder with one EE along the shared border (EE1); a
half-cylinder with two EEs, neither of which was along the shared border
(Convex2); a quarter-cylinder with one EE not along the shared border
(Convex1); and a ﬂat surface perpendicular to the line of sight (Flat). The
bottom display shows the EE2-Convex2 pairing, in which the two sides
were identical except for a 901 rotation in the picture plane.

ticipants received the same instructions as in Experiment 1, and
the sequence of events on each trial was also the same.

Results and Discussion
Figure 5 presents the percentage of trials on which each region
was chosen as the closer, ﬁgural region, averaged over positions
(left vs. right), colors (red vs. green), and contrast (high vs. low).
The bias toward seeing the EE regions as closer than the ﬂat
regions was overwhelming, with the half-cylinder and quarter-

82

cylinder EE regions (EE2 and EE1, respectively) being seen as
closer on 96% and 90% of the trials, respectively, ts(7) 5 16.15
and 5.56, ps < .001. The bias toward perceiving the half-cylinder EE regions (EE2) as closer than the non-EE convex regions was equally powerful, with the former regions being seen
as closer on 95% of trials when the non-EE region was a halfcylinder (Convex2) and 96% of trials when the non-EE region
was a quarter-cylinder (Convex1), ts(8) 5 15.94 and 14.55, ps <
.001, respectively. The quarter-cylinder EE regions (EE1) were
also seen as closer than the rotated convex versions on 85% of
the trials with half-cylinder non-EE regions (Convex2) and 90%
of the trials with quarter-cylinder non-EE regions (Convex1),
ts(7) 5 4.45 and 6.13, ps < .001, respectively. There was a
reliable bias toward seeing the half-cylinder EE regions (EE2)
as closer than the quarter-cylinder EE regions (EE1), t(7) 5
8.52, p < .001. Because both sides contained an EE along the
shared contour in this condition, this bias may reﬂect either the
presence of the second EE in the half-cylinder EE regions or the
fact that the surface curvature was greater in the half-cylinder
than in the quarter-cylinder EE region. Further research is
needed to determine the cause of this bias.
As in Experiment 1, there was a small bias toward seeing the
half-cylinder non-EE regions (Convex2) as closer than the ﬂat
regions (57%), but the effect was not statistically reliable, t(7) 5
0.69, p > .50. The quarter-cylinder non-EE regions (Convex1)
produced a trend that was, if anything, in the opposite direction
(42%), but also was not signiﬁcant, t(7) 5 0.83, p > .40. Thus,
we found no clear evidence that curvature, by itself, is a cue to
depth and ﬁgural status in textured displays. We note, however,
that texture size actually opposed curvature in this experiment
because the size gradient along the shared edge made the texture
elements on the EE side a good deal smaller than those on the
ﬂat side.
We performed a stepwise multiple regression analysis to
predict the data shown in Figure 5 from presence versus absence
of (a) an EE on the closer, shared edge (EE-close); (b) an EE on
the far edge (EE-far); (c) an EE orthogonal to the edge (EE-ortho); (d) depth convexity; and (e) a gradient cut. EE-close was
entered ﬁrst and accounted for 92% of the variance, F(1, 23) 5
263.40, p < .001. EE-far was entered next and accounted for 4%
of additional variance, F(1, 22) 5 22.98, p < .001. With just
these two variables, the model had a multiple r of .98 and accounted for 96% of the variance. The other variables did not
reach the criterion for entry into the regression equation (p <
.05), and when we forced the gradient-cut variable into the
equation with EE-close and EE-far, the multiple regression
program removed it. Thus, gradient cuts do not appear to be an
important factor in the results of this experiment; all of the
predictable variance was associated with the presence versus
absence of an EE along the shared contour (EE-close) or on the
far side (EE-far). These results leave little doubt that the primary
bias toward perceiving the EE side as closer and ﬁgural was, in
fact, due to the presence of EEs along the central shared contour.

Volume 19—Number 1

Stephen E. Palmer and Tandra Ghose

Fig. 5. Results of Experiment 2. Percentage of trials on which observers chose each region
indicated along the abscissa when it was paired with each of the other regions (indicated by
the shading of the bars). See Figure 4 for an explanation of the labels of the regions. Asterisks
indicate percentages that deviated signiﬁcantly from chance (i.e., the dashed line at 50%),
p < .001.

CONCLUSION

A viewpoint-based ecological analysis of the depth implications
of EEs implies that when there is an EE on one side of the shared
contour, the EE region is more likely than the non-EE region to
be closer to the observer. We tested this prediction by having
human observers report their perception of depth and ﬁgural status in EE displays rendered by shading gradients and
texture gradients. Both factors strongly biased observers to perceive the EE side as closer and ﬁgural. Indeed, subsequent
results from our laboratory (Palmer & Ghose, 2006) show that
EEs are powerful enough to dominate even the combination of

Fig. 6. Demonstration that extremal edges (EEs) can dominate classical
ﬁgure-ground cues. In the illustration on the left, the combination of
small size, convexity, and surroundedness strongly biases perception toward seeing the darker central circle as closer and ﬁgural. However, in
the illustration on the right, the addition of an exterior EE deﬁned by
shading and highlights easily overpowers these otherwise potent classical
ﬁgure-ground cues.

Volume 19—Number 1

surroundedness, small size, and convexity, three of the classical
factors that most strongly bias perception of a region as ﬁgural
(see Fig. 6). The present ﬁndings thus demonstrate that human
perception conforms to ecological predictions based on general
viewpoint considerations: Regions with an EE along the shared
edge are highly likely to be perceived as closer to the observer
than the regions on the other side of the edge.
REFERENCES
Bahnsen, P. (1928). Eine Untersuchung über Symmetrie und Asymmetrie bei visuellen Wahrnehmungen. Zeitschrift für Psychologie,
108, 129–154.
Barrow, H.G., & Tennenbaum, J.M. (1978). Recovering intrinsic scene
characteristics from images. In A. Hanson & E. Riseman (Eds.),
Computer vision systems (pp. 3–26). New York: Academic Press.
Brainard, D.H. (1997). The Psychophysics Toolbox. Spatial Vision, 10,
433–436.
Freeman, W.T. (1996). Exploiting the generic viewpoint assumption.
International Journal of Computer Vision, 20, 243–261.
Helmholtz, H. von. (1925). Treatise on physiological optics (3rd ed.,
Vol. 3; J.P.C. Southall, Trans.). New York: Optical Society of
America. (Original work published 1867)
Horn, B.K.P. (1975). Obtaining shape from shading information. In
P.H. Winston (Ed.), The psychology of computer vision (pp. 115–
155). New York: McGraw-Hill.
Huggins, P.S., Chen, H.F., Belhumeur, P.N., & Zucker, S.W. (2001).
Finding folds: On the appearance and identiﬁcation of occlusion.
In Proceedings of the 2001 IEEE Computer Society Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (Vol. 2, pp. 718–725).
Los Alamitos, CA: IEEE Computer Society.

83

Extremal Edges

Huggins, P.S., & Zucker, S.W. (2001a). Folds and cuts: How shading
ﬂows into edges. In Proceedings, Eighth IEEE International
Conference on Computer Vision (Vol. II, pp. 153–158). Los Alamitos, CA: IEEE Computer Society.
Huggins, P.S., & Zucker, S.W. (2001b). How folds cut a scene. In C.
Arcelli, L.P. Cordella, & G. Sanniti de Baja (Eds.), Visual Form
2001: 4th International Workshop on Visual Form (pp. 323–332).
Berlin, Germany: Springer.
Hulleman, J., & Humphreys, G.W. (2004). A new cue to ﬁgure-ground
coding: Top-bottom polarity. Vision Research, 44, 2779–2791.
Kanizsa, G., & Gerbino, W. (1976). Convexity and symmetry in ﬁgureground organization. In M. Henle (Ed.), Vision and artifact (pp.
25–32). New York: Springer.
Koenderink, J.J., & van Doorn, A.J. (1976). Geometry of binocular
vision and a model for stereopsis. Biological Cybernetics, 24, 51.
Malik, J. (1987). Interpreting line drawings of curved objects. International Journal of Computer Vision, 1, 73–103.
Malik, J., & Rosenholtz, R. (1994). Recovering surface curvature and
orientation from texture distortion: A least squares algorithm and
sensitivity analysis. In Proceedings of the Third European Conference on Computer Vision (pp. 353–364). New York: Springer-Verlag.
Metzger, W. (2006). The laws of seeing (L. Spillmann, Trans.). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. (Original work published 1936)
Nakayama, K., & Shimojo, S. (1992). Experiencing and perceiving
visual surfaces. Science, 257, 1357–1363.
Palmer, S.E. (1999). Vision science: Photons to phenomenology. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Palmer, S.E., & Brooks, J.L. (in press). Edge-region grouping in ﬁgureground organization and depth perception. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance.

84

Palmer, S.E., & Ghose, T. (2006, May). Extremal edges dominate
other cues to ﬁgure-ground and depth perception. Paper presented
at the annual meeting of the Vision Science Society, Sarasota,
FL.
Peterson, M.A., & Gibson, B.S. (1991). The initial identiﬁcation of
ﬁgure-ground relationships: Contributions from shape recognition
processes. Bulletin of the Psychonomic Society, 29, 199–202.
Peterson, M.A., & Gibson, B.S. (1994). Must ﬁgure-ground organization precede object recognition? An assumption in peril. Psychological Science, 5, 253–259.
Pinna, B., Brelstaff, G., & Spillmann, L. (2001). Surface color from
boundaries: A new ‘watercolor’ illusion. Vision Research, 41,
2669–2676.
Rubin, E. (1958). Figure and ground. In D.C. Beardslee & M. Wertheimer (Eds.), Readings in perception (pp. 194–203). Princeton,
NJ: Van Nostrand. (Original work published 1921)
Shepard, R.N. (1990). Mind sights: Original visual illusions, ambiguities, and other anomalies, with a commentary on the play of
mind in perception and art. San Francisco: Freeman.
Vecera, S.P., Vogel, E.K., & Woodman, G.F. (2002). Lower region: A
new cue for ﬁgure-ground assignment. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 131, 194–205.
von der Heydt, R., & Pierson, R. (2006). Dissociation of color and
ﬁgure-ground effects in the watercolor illusion. Spatial Vision, 19,
323–340.

(RECEIVED 4/7/07; REVISION ACCEPTED 6/25/07)

Volume 19—Number 1

