PS YC HOLOGICA L SC IENCE

Research Report

What Do Cross-National
Comparisons of Personality
Traits Tell Us?
The Case of Conscientiousness
Steven J. Heine, Emma E. Buchtel, and Ara Norenzayan
University of British Columbia

ABSTRACT—Much

research contrasts self-reported personality traits across cultures. We submit that this enterprise is weakened by significant methodological problems
(in particular, the reference-group effect) that undermine
the validity of national averages of personality scores. In
this study, behavioral and demographic predictors of conscientiousness were correlated with different cross-national measures of conscientiousness based on self-reports,
peer reports, and perceptions of national character. The
predictors correlated strongly with perceptions of national
character, but not with self-reports and peer reports.
Country-level self- and peer-report measures of conscientiousness failed as markers of between-nation differences
in personality.
Canadians and Americans agree that Canadians are generally
more agreeable than their southern neighbors. Is this judgment
accurate? One way to investigate this question would be to
compare the average agreeableness of Canadians with that of
Americans to see how well the country scores align with people’s
perceptions. In an influential analysis (McCrae & Terracciano,
2006; Terracciano et al., 2005), there was no correlation between profiles of actual reported personality traits and people’s
perceptions of the character of their own country. On this basis,
McCrae and Terracciano (2006) argued that such perceptions of
national character (PNCs) are illusory.
We found these results surprising (also see McGrath &
Goldberg, 2006). Past research has shown that agreement on

Address correspondence to Steven J. Heine, 2136 West Mall, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia V6T 1Z4,
Canada, e-mail: heine@psych.ubc.ca.

Volume 19—Number 4

cultural differences becomes stronger with increased cultural
contact (Triandis & Vassiliou, 1967), and that perceptions of
group differences are often, although not always, quite accurate
(Jussim, 2005; McCauley, 1995). Conceptions of culture as a
shared meaning system suggest that one can make meaningful
and relatively accurate judgments about one’s own culture (Wan
et al., 2007).
Relying on self- and peer reports to assess individual differences in personality has become a widely used approach to investigating cross-cultural differences (e.g., McCrae & Terracciano, 2006; Schmitt et al., 2007). Therefore, determining the
validity of this method across cultures is of utmost importance
(Norenzayan & Heine, 2005). In the study reported here, we
investigated the validity of self- and peer reports and PNC
comparisons across cultures. We argue that methodological
problems compromise the validity of aggregate self- and peerreport data across cultures. Focusing on conscientiousness as a
test case, we present new behavioral and demographic evidence
suggesting that PNC data are more valid as a measure of between-culture differences in behavior than are aggregate selfreport and peer-report data.
Comparing means on subjective Likert self-report scales is
the most commonly used method for investigating cross-cultural
differences, yet there are many methodological challenges associated with this approach (for discussion, see Cohen, 2007;
van de Vijver & Leung, 2001). One such challenge is the reference-group effect (RGE; Heine, Lehman, Peng, & Greenholtz,
2002; Peng, Nisbett, & Wong, 1997), the tendency for people to
respond to subjective self-report items by comparing themselves
with implicit standards from their culture (Heine et al., 2002).
Consider how one would respond to the items on the Revised
NEO Personality Inventory (NEO-PI-R; Costa & McCrae, 1992).
For example, one’s response to ‘‘I am not a very methodical

Copyright r 2008 Association for Psychological Science

309

Validating Cross-Cultural Studies of Personality

person’’ would hinge greatly on one’s understanding of the
norms for being methodical. Because norms differ across
cultures, the RGE systematically distorts cultural differences.
Note that the RGE is a problem only for comparing aggregate
data between cultures; it is not implicated in contrasts of individuals within a shared cultural context.
The RGE is an issue regarding self- and peer reports, as respondents need to compare their evaluations against standards
largely based on observations of people within their cultures.
However, the RGE is less likely to contaminate PNCs. This is
because when people are asked to evaluate their ‘‘average
compatriot,’’ they likely bring to mind a standard that lies outside their own culture, for example, a perceived international
norm. Some evidence supporting this idea was obtained in the
influential study mentioned earlier: The variance of the PNC
cultural means was much larger than the variance of the cultural
means of self- or peer ratings (Terracciano et al., 2005).
ESTABLISHING VALIDITY: BEHAVIORAL AND
DEMOGRAPHIC PREDICTORS OF PERSONALITY
ACROSS CULTURES

What is the existing evidence that cross-national comparisons of
personality traits are valid? One piece of evidence is that some
of Hofstede’s (2001) cultural dimensions correlate with some of
the Big Five measures (McCrae, 2002). However, these correlations are not a priori theoretically relevant (e.g., neuroticism
and masculinity are correlated, but for theoretically unknown
reasons), and we note that no significant correlations between
Big Five and Hofstede’s dimensions were replicated across three
independent measures of the Big Five (McCrae, 2002; McCrae
et al., 2005; Schmitt et al., 2007). Another piece of evidence is
that geographically and historically related cultures (such as
Germany and Austria) have similar personality profiles (McCrae
& Terracciano, 2006). However, cultures with similar reference
groups (i.e., cultures that share similar norms) would yield this
same pattern. Other criteria, particularly those that do not rely
on self-report measures, are needed to validate cross-national
comparisons of personality traits. We focus here on a criterion
that is frequently relied on in evaluating trait measures (e.g.,
Gosling, Ko, Mannarelli, & Morris, 2002): whether the trait
scores predict actual behavior.
METHOD AND RESULTS

A challenge in validating personality traits across cultures is
assessing behaviors that unambiguously map on to the Big Five
dimensions. Past within-culture studies have suggested that the
personality trait of conscientiousness is relatively easily identified, through both behavior and markers of behavior (see
Gosling et al., 2002; Roberts, Kuncel, Shiner, Caspi, & Goldberg, 2007). A second challenge is the sheer cost and difficulty
of obtaining such measures in a large number of different cultural contexts. Fortuitously, a large-scale research project by

310

Levine and Norenzayan (1999) assessed behavioral measures of
‘‘pace of life’’ in major cities from 31 countries. Specifically,
walking speed, postal workers’ speed, and the accuracy of clocks
in public banks were measured. For the measure of walking
speed, 35 men and 35 women were timed unobtrusively as they
walked alone for a distance of 60 ft in unobstructed public
squares during business hours in major downtown locations.
Postal workers’ efficiency was measured by the amount of time it
took to buy one stamp, using a bill that required change in both
coins and paper. At least eight postal workers at randomly selected postal offices were timed in each city. Finally, the accuracy of 15 randomly selected bank clocks was assessed in each
city. These variables, which were adequately intercorrelated,
are arguably behavioral indicators of conscientiousness (see
Allik & McCrae, 2004).
There are also demographic variables associated with personality. Roberts et al. (2007) found that occupational success
can be reliably predicted by personality traits, and that among
the Big Five, conscientiousness is the best predictor of such
success (see Judge, Higgins, Thoresen, & Barrick, 1999). We
did not have direct measures of the average occupational success of nations. However, one national indicator of economic
success is per capita gross domestic product (GDP). No doubt, a
nation’s GDP is a complex variable reflecting a variety of historical, political, and sociodemographic factors. Nevertheless, a
country’s per capita GDP is related to the occupational success
of its citizens, so per capita GDP should correlate with the average conscientiousness of its citizens. We included per capita
GDP as reported in The World Factbook (Central Intelligence
Agency, 2007) as a demographic variable in this study.
Personality is also reliably associated with longevity (Roberts
et al., 2007), and conscientiousness is the best predictor of
longevity among the Big Five. The average life expectancy of
nations was also obtained from The World Factbook (Central
Intelligence Agency, 2007).1
We correlated our validity criteria (walking speed, postal
workers’ speed, accuracy of clocks in public banks, per capita
GDP, and longevity) with a variety of measures of conscientiousness.2 Specifically, conscientiousness was measured by
aggregated self-reports on the NEO-PI-R (McCrae, 2002) and
the Big Five Inventory (Benet-Martı́nez & John, 1998; Schmitt
et al., 2007), aggregated peer reports on the NEO-PI-R (McCrae
et al., 2005), and average PNC scores from Terracciano et al.
(2005). Table 1 reports the correlations in two ways. In each cell,
the correlation on the left was calculated using pair-wise deletion of data. These correlations are based on between 17 and 55
1
We have provided a table of all the values for each country on the Web at
http://www.psych.ubc.ca/ heine/personalitydata.xls.
2
The analyses reported by Terracciano et al. (2005) were conducted by
correlating the individual facet scores from the different measures; in contrast,
we report the correlations between factor scores for personality and behavioral
and demographic variables. We were unable to analyze the facet scores, as these
data were not available to us.

Volume 19—Number 4

Steven J. Heine, Emma E. Buchtel, and Ara Norenzayan

TABLE 1
Correlations Between Personality Traits and Behavioral and Demographic Measures of Conscientiousness
Validity criterion
Personality measure
Self-report NEO-PI-R
Self-report BFI
Peer-report NEO-PI-R
PNC

Postal workers’
speed

Clock
accuracy

Walking
speed

.57 / .58
.28/ .42
.16/.42
.68nn/.72n

.34/ .39
.07/ .18
.07/ .10
.69nn/.71n

.27/ .43
.14/.15
.11/.01
.50n/.68n

n

GDP

Longevity

.66 / .16
.32n/.08
.03/ .12
.40nn/.69n
nn

.38 / .38
.51nn/ .16
.33n/ .11
.01/.74n
n

Average
.43
.19
.06
.61

Note. In each cell, the correlation on the left was calculated using pair-wise deletion of missing data (n 517–55), and the correlation on the
right was calculated using case-wise deletion of missing data (n 5 10). BFI 5 Big Five Inventory (Benet-Martı́nez & John, 1998; Schmitt et
al., 2007); GDP 5 gross domestic product (Central Intelligence Agency, 2007); NEO-PI-R 5 Revised NEO Personality Inventory
(McCrae, 2002; McCrae et al., 2005); PNC 5 perceptions of national character (Terracciano et al., 2005).
n
p < .05. nnp < .01.

countries. The right-hand correlation in each cell was calculated
using case-wise deletion of data, which reduced the sample to
the 10 countries for which we had data for all measures.3 Although the pair-wise-deletion analyses had a larger sample that
was thus more representative of a worldwide sample, the casewise-deletion analyses allowed for more accurate comparisons
across measures, as in these analyses the measures were compared across the same countries.
The analyses revealed that the aggregate self-report data from
the NEO-PI-R correlated negatively with all the validity criteria
for both sets of countries (average r 5 .43).4 Likewise, the
aggregate self-report data from the Big Five Inventory correlated
negatively with the validity criteria (average r 5 .19). The
aggregate peer-report data from the NEO-PI-R showed mixed
correlations with the validity criteria. Overall, the pattern
yielded null correlations (r 5 .06). In sum, none of the self-report or peer-report data were reliably associated with the validity
criteria in the predicted direction.
In contrast, the PNC data correlated positively and significantly with all five of the validity criteria, with the sole exception
of longevity with pair-wise deletions. The average correlation
between the PNC data and the validity criteria was .61. This is
evidence that the PNC data have greater validity for measuring
conscientiousness than the aggregate self- and peer-report data
do.
The five validity criteria we used are not independent; indeed,
the correlations among them ranged from .25 to .71, and the
average correlation was .47—a value higher than is typically
obtained for correlations among items in trait measures. One
possible explanation for these high interitem correlations is that
the behavioral criteria simply reflect the consequences of
wealth, and that participating in a wealthy society leads people
to work more effectively, walk faster, and live longer. We there3
The 10 countries that had data for all dependent variables were Canada, the
Czech Republic, France, Germany, Hong Kong, Indonesia, Italy, Japan, South
Korea, and the United States.
4
All average correlations were calculated from r-to-Z-to-r transformations
(see McNemar, 1962).

Volume 19—Number 4

fore recalculated the correlations after partialing out per capita
GDP (see Table 2). The average partial correlation between the
NEO-PI-R self-report data and the criteria was weakly negative,
as was the average correlation between the Big Five Inventory
self-report data and the criteria. The average correlation between the NEO-PI-R peer-report data and the criteria was
weakly positive (r 5 .15). In contrast, the average correlation
between the PNC data and the validity criteria was moderately
positive (r 5 .41), and seven of the eight partial correlations for the PNC data were positive. In sum, after per capita
GDP was partialed out, the aggregate self- and peer-report
measures did not reliably predict the remaining validity criteria,
whereas the PNC data still showed good validity.
DISCUSSION

The lack of correlation between aggregate self- and peer-report
personality measures and people’s views of their compatriots,
as reported in Terracciano et al. (2005), is a problem. However,
we submit that it is caused by various methodological challenges
that plague cross-cultural comparisons of mean scores on Likert
scales. We suspect that the primary confound undermining the
aggregate personality measures is the RGE; however, a number
of other response biases may also be implicated (see Cohen,
2007; van de Vijver & Leung, 2001). In contrast, people’s impressions of their compatriots’ personalities appear to reasonably reflect measures of their compatriots’ behaviors.
Cross-cultural comparisons of aggregate self- and peer-report
measures of personality fail a number of validity tests. First, as
McCrae (2001) noted, country rankings do not correlate with
how cultural experts view the ranked countries, and thus are not
validated by expert opinions. Second, we have found that aggregate self- and peer-report measures of personality (at least in
the case of conscientiousness) do not correlate with either behavioral or demographic indicators. Third, these measures do
not correlate with people’s impressions of their compatriots (viz.,
the PNC data). The fact that aggregate self- and peer-report data
do not correlate with validity criteria is consistent with the fact

311

Validating Cross-Cultural Studies of Personality

TABLE 2
Partial Correlations Between Personality Traits and Behavioral and Demographic Measures of
Conscientiousness, Controlling for Per Capita Gross Domestic Product
Validity criterion
Personality measure
Self-report NEO-PI-R
Self-report BFI
Peer-report NEO-PI-R
PNC

Postal workers’
speed

Clock
accuracy

Walking
speed

Longevity

.26/ .57
.11/ .49
.18/.51
.60n/.69n

.02/ .41
.10/ .35
.06/ .01
.61nn/.42

.33/ .56
.10/.16
.18/.22
.35/.25

.03/ .47
.42nn/ .45
.39nn/ .02
.31n/.42

Average
.26
.20
.15
.41

Note. In each cell, the correlation on the left was calculated using pair-wise deletion of missing data (n 5 17–55), and the
correlation on the right was calculated using case-wise deletion of missing data (n 5 10). BFI 5 Big Five Inventory (BenetMartı́nez & John, 1998; Schmitt et al., 2007); NEO-PI-R 5 Revised NEO Personality Inventory (McCrae, 2002; McCrae
et al., 2005); PNC 5 perceptions of national character (Terracciano et al., 2005).
n
p < .05. nnp < .01.

that cross-cultural comparisons of mean scores on Likert scales
often yield findings sharply at odds with those obtained using
experimental measures (Heine et al., 2002).
A key tenet of cultural psychology is that culture and self are
mutually constituted (Shweder, 1990). We think the present
investigation demonstrates this point well. Participating in a
world where clocks are on time and people work effectively and
earn a good income leads people to adopt conscientious habits,
and these habits continue to shape and reinforce the surrounding culture. Culture and self thus come to make each other up.
We suggest that people participating in such a culture develop
personalities that are, on average, more conscientious than the
personalities of people who participate in ‘‘event-time cultures,’’
where activities transpire according to a spontaneous schedule
(Levine & Norenzayan, 1999). Participation in a cultural world
comes to shape the cultural norms that people perceive as
reflecting general conscientiousness. These norms are apparent when people evaluate their culture (Wan et al., 2007), although they might not be detected in self-report assessments as
people implicitly compare themselves with these perceived
norms.
Our investigation was limited to conscientiousness. It is conceivable that for the remaining four Big Five personality traits,
the PNC measure is not accurate, but the self- and peer-report
measures are. However, it is not obvious why a different pattern
would emerge for the other traits. One clear direction for future
research would be to obtain measures of behavioral markers of
other personality traits across a large array of cultures. A major
challenge lies in first identifying cross-culturally valid behavioral markers of the remaining Big Five traits.
A second limitation of our study is that we did not assess our
various measures with the same group of participants: Different
individuals completed each of the personality and behavioral
measures, and, moreover, our GDP variable was not an aggregate
of individual responses, as the other measures were. The ideal
study would involve a multilevel framework in which personality

312

traits, behavioral measures, and economic variables are collected from the same individuals.
Another limitation of our investigation concerns the quality
of the validity criteria. It can be debated how well the specific
criteria that we chose map on to conscientiousness. More generally, behavioral measures have a number of weaknesses for
assessing personality (see Funder, 2007). Furthermore, a given
behavior might have different meanings in different cultures; for
example, frequency of bowing would be a poor indicator of politeness in the United States, although it would be a good indicator in Japan. However, in some key respects, behaviors are
especially strong measures for cross-cultural research as they
are immune to most of the methodological artifacts that plague
cross-cultural comparisons (Peng et al., 1997). Behavioral and
demographic measures are valuable but not faultless criteria by
which to validate cultural differences. Research on crosscultural differences would be improved by greater use of such
validity criteria to corroborate findings that emerge from questionnaire and laboratory studies.
CONCLUSION

Mindlessly applying inaccurate stereotypes opens the door for
misunderstanding and mistreating people from other cultures
(McCrae, 2001). Yet equally problematic to cross-cultural relations is insensitivity to real cultural differences. Such insensitivity encourages ethnocentric projections, perpetuating the
unfounded belief that people in other cultures are ‘‘just like us.’’
The evidence discussed here suggests that PNCs, not aggregate
self- or peer reports of personality, reflect the kinds of cultural
differences in personality that are important for increasing
intercultural understanding.
Acknowledgments—This research was funded by the Social
Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada (410-

Volume 19—Number 4

Steven J. Heine, Emma E. Buchtel, and Ara Norenzayan

2004-0795). We thank Jess Tracy for her helpful feedback on an
earlier draft.
REFERENCES
Allik, J., & McCrae, R.R. (2004). Toward a geography of personality
traits: Patterns of profiles across 36 cultures. Journal of CrossCultural Psychology, 35, 13–28.
Benet-Martı́nez, V., & John, O.P. (1998). Los Cinco Grandes across
cultures and ethnic groups: Multitrait multimethod analysis of
the Big Five in Spanish and English. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 75, 729–750.
Central Intelligence Agency. (2007). The world factbook. Washington,
DC: Potomac Books.
Cohen, D. (2007). Methods in cultural psychology. In S. Kitayama & D.
Cohen (Eds.), Handbook of cultural psychology (pp. 196–236).
New York: Guilford.
Costa, P.T., Jr., & McCrae, R.R. (1992). Revised NEO Personality Inventory (NEO-PI-R) and NEO Five Factor Inventory (NEO-FFI)
professional manual. Odessa, FL: Psychological Assessment Resources.
Funder, D.C. (2007). The personality puzzle (4th ed.). New York: W.W.
Norton.
Gosling, S.D., Ko, S.J., Mannarelli, T., & Morris, M.E. (2002). A room
with a cue: Personality judgments based on offices and bedrooms.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 82, 379–398.
Heine, S.J., Lehman, D.R., Peng, K., & Greenholtz, J. (2002). What’s
wrong with cross-cultural comparisons of subjective Likert scales?:
The reference-group effect. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 82, 903–918.
Hofstede, G. (2001). Culture’s consequences: Comparing values, behaviors, institutions, and organizations across nations (2nd ed.).
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Judge, T.A., Higgins, C.A., Thoresen, C.J., & Barrick, M.R. (1999).
The big five personality traits, general mental ability, and career
success across the life span. Personnel Psychology, 52, 621–652.
Jussim, L. (2005). Accuracy in social perception: Criticisms, controversies, criteria, components, and cognitive processes. In M.P.
Zanna (Ed.), Advances in experimental social psychology (Vol. 37,
pp. 2–97). San Diego, CA: Elsevier Academic Press.
Levine, R.V., & Norenzayan, A. (1999). The pace of life in 31 countries. Journal of Cross-Cultural Psychology, 30, 178–205.
McCauley, C. (1995). Are stereotypes exaggerated? A sampling of
racial, gender, occupational, academic, and political stereotypes.
In Y.T. Lee, L. Jussim, & C.R. McCauley (Eds.), Stereotype accuracy: Toward appreciating group differences (pp. 293–312).
Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
McCrae, R.R. (2001). Trait psychology and culture: Exploring intercultural comparisons. Journal of Personality, 69, 819–846.
McCrae, R.R. (2002). NEO-PI-R data from 36 cultures: Further intercultural comparisons. In R.R. McCrae & J. Allik (Eds.), The

Volume 19—Number 4

Five-Factor Model of personality across cultures (pp. 105–126).
New York: Kluwer.
McCrae, R.R., & Terracciano, A. (2006). National character and
personality. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 15, 156–
161.
McCrae, R.R., Terracciano, A., & 79 members of the Personality
Profiles of Cultures Project. (2005). Personality profiles of cultures: Aggregate personality traits. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 89, 407–425.
McGrath, R.E., & Goldberg, L.R. (2006). How to measure national
stereotypes? Science, 311, 776–777.
McNemar, Q. (1962). Psychological statistics (3rd ed.). New York:
Wiley.
Norenzayan, A., & Heine, S.J. (2005). Psychological universals: What
are they and how can we know? Psychological Bulletin, 131, 763–
784.
Peng, K., Nisbett, R.E., & Wong, N.Y.C. (1997). Validity problems
comparing values across cultures and possible solutions. Psychological Methods, 2, 329–344.
Roberts, B.W., Kuncel, N.R., Shiner, R., Caspi, A., & Goldberg, L.R.
(2007). The power of personality: The comparative validity of
personality traits, socioeconomic status, and cognitive ability for
predicting important life outcomes. Perspectives on Psychological
Science, 2, 313–345.
Schmitt, D.P., Allik, J., McCrae, R.R., Benet-Martı́nez, V., Alcalay, L.,
Ault, L., et al. (2007). The geographic distribution of Big Five
personality traits: Patterns and profiles of human self-description
across 56 nations. Journal of Cross-Cultural Psychology, 38, 173–
212.
Shweder, R.A. (1990). Cultural psychology: What is it? In J.W. Stigler,
R.A. Shweder, & G. Herdt (Eds.), Cultural psychology: Essays on
comparative human development (pp. 1–43). Cambridge, England:
Cambridge University Press.
Terracciano, A., Abdel-Khalek, A.M., Ádám, N., Adamovová, L., Ahn,
C.-k., Ahn, H.-n., et al. (2005). National character does not reflect
mean personality trait levels in 49 cultures. Science, 310, 96–
100.
Triandis, H.C., & Vassiliou, V. (1967). Frequency of contact and
stereotyping. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 7,
316–328.
van de Vijver, F.J.R., & Leung, K. (2001). Personality in cultural
context: Methodological issues. Journal of Personality, 69, 1007–
1032.
Wan, C., Chiu, C., Tam, K., Lee, S., Lau, I.Y., & Peng, S. (2007).
Perceived cultural importance and actual self-importance of
values in cultural identification. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 92, 337–354.

(RECEIVED 7/12/07; REVISION ACCEPTED 10/8/07)

313

