PS YC HOLOGICA L SC IENCE

Research Article

Personality Dominance and
Preferential Use of the Vertical
Dimension of Space
Evidence From Spatial Attention Paradigms
Sara K. Moeller, Michael D. Robinson, and Darya L. Zabelina
North Dakota State University

ABSTRACT—Previous

research has shown that dominant
individuals frequently think in terms of dominance hierarchies, which typically invoke vertical metaphor (e.g.,
‘‘upper’’ vs. ‘‘lower’’ class). Accordingly, we predicted that
in spatial attention paradigms, such individuals would
systematically favor the vertical dimension of space more
than individuals low in dominance. This prediction was
supported by two studies (total N 5 96), which provided three tests involving two different spatial attention paradigms. In all cases, analyses controlling for speed of
response to horizontal spatial probes revealed that more
dominant individuals were faster than less dominant individuals to respond to probes along the vertical dimension
of space. Such data support the metaphor-representation
perspective, according to which people think in metaphoric terms, even in on-line processing tasks. These results have implications for understanding dominance and
also indicate that conceptual metaphor is relevant to understanding the cognitive-processing basis of personality.
There is a striking tendency to represent dominance in vertical
terms. This tendency is apparent in linguistic metaphor (Tolaas,
1991), anthropological data (Fiske, 1992), sociological data
(Schwartz, 1981), and scientiﬁc theories of personality dominance (e.g., Wiggins, 1996). The ubiquity of such mappings is
consistent with the central postulate of the metaphor-representation perspective, according to which people must draw
from the perceptual domain, as reﬂected in common metaphors,

Address correspondence to Sara Moeller, Psychology Department,
North Dakota State University, Fargo, ND 58105, e-mail: sara.
moeller@ndsu.edu.

Volume 19—Number 4

when attempting to represent abstract concepts such as dominance or power (Gibbs, 1994; Lakoff & Johnson, 1999).
The frequent pairing of dominance and verticality could be a
feature of the English language that is independent of deeper
concept-to-percept mappings (see Gibbs, 1994, for a review of
this position). Alternatively, this frequent pairing could be more
fundamental (Lakoff & Johnson, 1999). According to the latter view, people think in perceptual terms, particularly when
they are thinking about relatively abstract concepts, such as
dominance or status (Tolaas, 1991). A recent set of studies by
Schubert (2005) supports the fundamental, nonlinguistic view of
the pairing of dominance and verticality. Speciﬁcally, he showed
that incidental manipulations of verticality biased the speed
with which participants could classify dominant stimuli (i.e.,
dominant stimuli were categorized faster when presented higher
in visual space).
Other than Schubert’s (2005) study, however, few studies have
examined the extent to which dominance and verticality are
systematically linked in on-line processing. One of the purposes
of the studies reported here was to conduct such an examination.
In addition, we wanted to investigate whether the link between
dominance and verticality extends to the domain of individual
differences in dominance. Testing this possibility is useful for
two reasons. First, researchers have often expressed uncertainty
as to whether the metaphor-representation perspective can provide insight concerning individual differences within a culture
(Kövecses, 2000). If it cannot, this would constitute a signiﬁcant
limitation of this framework (Lakoff, 1986). Second, support for
the metaphor-representation perspective has routinely come
from studies in which the conceptual features of stimuli—
whether affect-related features (e.g., Meier, Robinson, Crawford, & Ahlvers, 2007) or dominance-related features (Schubert,
2005)—have been manipulated. Such stimulus manipulations

Copyright r 2008 Association for Psychological Science

355

Dominance and Use of the Vertical Dimension

might well ‘‘prime’’ the relevant metaphors (e.g., ‘‘good is light’’:
Meier et al., 2007), and it is unclear whether the links previously
found would be observed in the absence of such concept-related
manipulations. By examining individuals who differ in their
interpersonal dominance, one can examine links between
dominance and verticality without manipulating stimulus
dominance, and perhaps ﬁnd additional support for the ‘‘unconditional’’ (Bargh, 1997) nature of such associations.
DOMINANCE AND VERTICALITY

An important theory of social interaction (Haslam, 1997) posits
four models of human relations: authority ranking, equality matching, market pricing, and communal sharing. What is unique
about authority ranking, relative to the other three relational
models, is its focus on vertical asymmetries in power. There are
also theories in communication (Burgoon, Johnson, & Koch,
1998), anthropology (Fiske, 1992), and sociology (Schwartz,
1981) that refer to, and depict, interpersonal dominance in explicitly vertical terms. What is common to all of these theories,
then, is the fact that they conceptualize dominance and power in
terms of a vertical dimension of physical space.
If a vertical mode of conception is chronically accessible to
dominant individuals, then they should be prone to perception
along this vertical dimension as well. The present studies are
novel in examining this intriguing potential relationship. Because relatively dominant individuals have a tendency to conceptualize social relations in terms of verticality (Fiske, 1992;
Schwartz, 1981), they should exhibit a perceptual favoritism for
objects varying vertically in relation to a ﬁxation point. By
contrast, because less dominant individuals are prone to conceptualizing social relations in terms other than verticality
(Fiske, 1992; Schwartz, 1981), they should exhibit less perceptual favoritism for objects with a vertical relation to the ﬁxation
point. In sum, if we are correct that more dominant individuals
more frequently invoke vertical metaphors to think about themselves, other people, and their interactions with the world, then
it should also be the case that such individuals are biased toward
perceptual verticality, even in basic spatial attention tasks in
which dominance is not systematically primed.
THE PRESENT RESEARCH

We predicted that dominant individuals would exhibit biased
attention along the vertical dimension of physical space. To test
this theory-driven prediction, we administered two spatial attention tasks. In the ﬁrst, participants were unable to predict the
location of upcoming spatial probes. We presented these probes
in randomly selected locations—left, right, up, or down. Thus,
an association between dominance and facilitation of perception
along the vertical dimension on this task would be due to relatively automatic perceptual processes. The inclusion of the horizontal trials was not theoretically motivated, but rather allowed

356

us to systematically control for individual differences in speed,
which are quite pronounced on nearly any choice reaction time
task (Jensen, 1998; Robinson & Oishi, 2006).
In our second study, we also administered a spatial attention
task in which the location of the spatial probes was perfectly
predictable because they alternated between an upper position
and a lower position (in vertical blocks) or between a position on
the left and a position on the right (in horizontal blocks). Because
the probes’ locations were perfectly predictable, any signiﬁcant
performance differences between individuals could not be due to
variations in probe-location expectancies. Thus, if individuals
high in dominance were more skilled than individuals low in
dominance at recognizing probes along the vertical dimension in
the second task, we could conclude that this pattern was independent of possible individual differences in expectancies.
STUDY 1

Study 1 was an initial test of our hypothesis that more dominant
individuals would be faster to respond to spatial targets along the
vertical dimension of space. We ensured that attention was centered, both vertically and horizontally, at the start of each trial by
presenting a centering prime that the participant was required to
categorize. Immediately after this categorization response, a
spatial probe appeared in one of four randomly determined positions on the screen—up, down, left, or right. Because we used a
centering prime (akin to a ﬁxation), along with a nearly instantaneous presentation of the probe following the response to the
prime, performance reﬂected covert orienting, according to the
spatial attention literature (Pashler, 1998; Posner, 1978).
Method
Participants
Participants in Study 1 were 43 undergraduates (20 females,
23 males) from North Dakota State University. They received
extra credit for their classes.
Personality Dominance and Preliminary Analyses
We administered a 21-item personality-dominance scale from
the International Personality Item Pool (Goldberg et al., 2006).
This scale uses statements to assess personality dominance (e.g.,
‘‘impose my will on others,’’ ‘‘want to control the conversation’’).
Responses are made on a scale from 1 (very inaccurate) to 5 (very
accurate). In our sample, internal reliability was good (a 5 .70);
the mean and standard deviation were 3.06 and 0.42, respectively. The attention task was completed before the assessment
of trait dominance to preclude the possibility that completing
the trait scale ﬁrst might inﬂuence performance in the implicit
task (Robinson & Neighbors, 2006).
In no cases did participants’ sex modify the ﬁndings reported
here, all Fs < 1, so we have collapsed across this variable. Also,
we note that analyses examining possible Dominance  Vertical

Volume 19—Number 4

Sara K. Moeller, Michael D. Robinson, and Darya L. Zabelina

Spatial Attention Task
The task was presented on a computer screen. Participants were
told that the spatial probe would always appear within a prominent, white-outlined box that was 11.75 in. high by 11.75 in.
wide. All spatial probes were presented half an inch from the
relevant border of the box.
The task was simple: As quickly and accurately as possible,
participants indicated whether the letter p or q was presented, by
pressing the corresponding key of the keyboard (spatial attention paradigms are typically this simple: Pashler, 1998). Correct
responses were followed by a 200-ms blank interval, whereas
incorrect responses were followed by the message ‘‘Incorrect!’’
which was presented for 1,500 ms in order to encourage a high
degree of accuracy. To center ﬁxation prior to the appearance of
the spatial probes, and thereby ensure that every trial involved
the same centered attentional focus, we included an initial task
in which participants had to categorize a centrally presented
stimulus as either a letter (A, B, or C) or a number (1, 2, or 3).
Responses were made by pronouncing ‘‘letter’’ or ‘‘number’’ into
a voice key. When the oral response was registered, the central
ﬁxation stimulus disappeared and was immediately followed by
a spatial probe (i.e., the letter p or q) that appeared in one of the
four locations, determined randomly. Thus, the task assessed
spontaneous favoring of one dimension over the other (horizontal
vs. vertical) in covert-attention processes. There were 200 trials,
100 with vertical probes and 100 with horizontal probes. The
vertical probes were horizontally centered on the screen and
appeared above and below the central ﬁxation point; the horizontal probes were vertically centered on the screen and appeared left and right of the central ﬁxation point.
In calculating latency scores, we followed general recommendations in the literature. Speciﬁcally, we eliminated from
consideration trials on which the response was incorrect (mean
accuracy 5 94%) and log-transformed latencies to reduce skew;
outliers more than 2.5 standard deviations above and below the
mean were replaced with these 2.5-SD cutoff values (Robinson,
2007). Latencies on trials with vertical spatial probes were
averaged to obtain vertical-dimension scores, whereas latencies
on trials with horizontal spatial probes were averaged to obtain
horizontal-dimension scores.

Results
The horizontal probes did not differ from the vertical probes
except in their location, and dominance did not predict speed to
identify horizontal probes, r 5 .04, p 5 .81. We could therefore
use speed in responding to horizontal probes in order to control

Volume 19—Number 4

80

Verticality Residual Scores
(Milliseconds)

Location (up vs. down) and Dominance  Horizontal Location
(left vs. right) interactions yielded nonsigniﬁcant results (ps >
.10). We have therefore also collapsed across up and down locations in quantifying vertical performance and across left and right
locations in quantifying horizontal performance.

60
40
20
0
–20
–40
–60
–80
–100
–3

–2

–1

0

1

2

3

Z-Scored Dominance
Fig. 1. Scatter plot of the relation between personality dominance and
residual verticality scores in Study 1.

for irrelevant individual differences in speed. Accordingly,
we performed a simple regression in which log-transformed
reaction time on trials with horizontal probes (M 5 789 ms) was
entered as a predictor of log-transformed reaction time on trials
with vertical probes (M 5 810 ms). We then calculated a
residual speed score in which the common variance was statistically removed from consideration. Such residual scores were
necessarily correlated with performance on trials with vertical
probes, but necessarily uncorrelated with performance on trials
with horizontal probes (Robinson, 2007).
We predicted that dominance would systematically correlate
with residual verticality scores. This proved to be the case,
r 5 .42, p < .01. Speciﬁcally, as predicted, higher levels of
dominance were associated with lower scores (i.e., faster performance) on trials with vertical spatial probes. Figure 1 presents a
scatter plot illustrating the relationship between residual verticality scores and personality dominance. As the ﬁgure shows,
individuals 2 standard deviations below the mean on the dominance scale were 30 ms slower than one would expect on the basis
of their speed in responding to horizontal spatial probes. Conversely, individuals 2 standard deviations above the mean on the
dominance scale were 30 ms faster than one would expect given
their response speed for horizontal spatial probes. Thus, we
obtained initial evidence that dominance is associated with
biases favoring the vertical dimension in visual space.

Discussion
We predicted that dominant individuals would exhibit greater
facility with vertical spatial probes than with horizontal spatial
probes. To test this prediction, we administered a randomizedspatial-probe task and found that individuals high in dominance
were faster to respond to vertical probes than could be predicted
from their performance with horizontal spatial probes. These
results provide initial evidence that higher levels of personality

357

Dominance and Use of the Vertical Dimension

dominance are systematically related to enhanced attention to
the vertical dimension, a pattern consistent with the metaphorrepresentation perspective that guided our predictions.
STUDY 2

The purpose of Study 2 was threefold. First, we wanted to directly replicate Study 1, using the same paradigm. Second, we
sought to conceptually replicate the observed relation between
dominance and attention to the vertical dimension in a spatial
attention task using spatial probes that were perfectly predictable. Such a replication would indicate that the link between
higher levels of personality dominance and facility with the
vertical dimension of visual space is independent of expectancies for the location of randomly presented spatial stimuli.
Third, we wanted to conceptually replicate the results of Study 1
using a different measure of personality dominance.

speed of response to spatial probes was similar to that used in
Study 1 (mean accuracy 5 .95 and .96 in the random- and
predictable-location tasks, respectively).
The second task differed from the ﬁrst, however, in that probe
locations were blocked, such that all probes within a block were
located along the same dimension, either vertical or horizontal.
Each of the 10 blocks contained 20 trials, and block order was
randomly determined for each participant. Furthermore, the
probe locations alternated between up and down in vertical
blocks and between left and right in horizontal blocks. And as in
Study 1, the vertical probes were horizontally centered on the
screen, and the horizontal probes were vertically centered on the
screen. Thus, the location of probes in the second task was perfectly predictable, which equated location expectancies across
participants. Because the location of the probes was entirely
predictable, we viewed the second task as assessing individual
differences in the ability to attend to and shift attention along the
vertical dimension (relative to the horizontal dimension).

Method
Participants
Participants were 53 undergraduates (29 females, 24 males)
from North Dakota State University. They received extra credit
for their classes.
Personality Dominance, Procedure, and Preliminary Analyses
Personality dominance was assessed with the relevant dimension from Wiggins’s (1979) circumplex measure. Participants
indicated the extent (1 5 extremely inaccurate, 6 5 extremely
accurate) to which 14 markers of high (e.g., ‘‘dominant’’ and
‘‘forceful’’) and low (e.g., ‘‘meek’’ and ‘‘shy’’) interpersonal dominance characterized them generally. The low-dominance items
were reverse-scored. The scale proved to be highly reliable (a 5
.72; M 5 3.36, SD 5 0.29). A pilot test indicated that the
dominance measures used in Studies 1 and 2 are positively
correlated to a high degree, though not so highly as to suggest
isomorphism of the measures, r 5 .66, p < .01. Thus, conceptual
replication with the new dominance measure seemed useful.
As in Study 1, personality dominance was assessed last, after
participants performed the spatial attention tasks. We deemed it
best to administer the random-location task from Study 1 before
the new predictable-location task in order to preclude priming of
location expectancies.
Spatial Attention Tasks
The ﬁrst spatial attention task was identical to the one used in
Study 1. In the second task, the location of the spatial probe
varied predictably. As in the ﬁrst task, participants were instructed to be both quick and accurate, the spatial probes were
the letters q and p, the probes appeared half an inch inside the
relevant border of the prominently displayed box (either left,
right, up, or down), and there were 200 trials (100 with vertical
probes and 100 with horizontal probes). The method for scoring

358

Results
In neither task was there a correlation between dominance and
performance on trials with horizontal probes, r 5 .08, p 5 .60, for
the random-location task and r 5 .07, p 5 .64, for the predictablelocation task. Thus, in both tasks, we could use performance on
trials with horizontal probes to control for general speed factors of
no interest in this study. Accordingly, for each task, we performed a
simple regression in which performance on trials with horizontal
probes (Ms 5 861 ms and 623 ms for the random- and predictablelocation tasks, respectively) was entered as a predictor of performance on trials with vertical probes (Ms 5 893 ms and 637 ms for
the random- and predictable-location tasks, respectively). The
results of the simple regressions were used to create two residual
vertical-attention scores, one for each task, that were uncorrelated
with speed in responding to horizontal spatial probes.
We then correlated interpersonal dominance with the residual
verticality scores for each task considered separately. Both
correlations were signiﬁcant, r 5 .28, p < .05, for the randomlocation task and r 5 .31, p < .05, for the predictable-location
task. As in Study 1, the direction of these correlations indicates
that higher levels of dominance were associated with lower
residual scores (i.e., faster performance). Figure 2 presents
scatter plots showing the relations between personality dominance and residual vertical-attention scores on the two tasks.
As the ﬁgure shows, individuals 2 standard deviations below
the mean for dominance were slower than one would expect
given their performance on trials with horizontal probes (by
approximately 30 ms in the random-location task and by approximately 15 ms in the predictable-location task). By contrast,
individuals 2 standard deviations above the mean for dominance
were faster than one would expect given their speed in responding to horizontal probes. These are rather pronounced

Volume 19—Number 4

Verticality Residual Scores
(Milliseconds)

Sara K. Moeller, Michael D. Robinson, and Darya L. Zabelina

150

GENERAL DISCUSSION

100

Both embodied theories of social cognition (for a review, see
Niedenthal, Barsalou, Winkielman, Krauth-Gruber, & Ric,
2005) and the metaphor-representation perspective (Gibbs,
1994; Lakoff & Johnson, 1999) have generally focused on normative effects, rather than those related to personality variables.
However, we have suggested that the latter perspective can offer
important process-oriented insights into personality functioning
(Meier & Robinson, 2005). The present results provide novel
evidence along these lines.
Simply stated, more dominant individuals think in dominance-related terms to a greater extent than do less dominant
individuals (e.g., Moskowitz & Zuroff, 2005; Wiggins, 1996).
That is, their thoughts more often involve power, powerlessness,
and relative dominance (Keltner, Gruenfeld, & Anderson, 2003).
Because there is an intimate link between dominance-related representational processes and vertical perceptual metaphor (Lakoff
& Johnson, 1999; Schwartz, 1981; Tolaas, 1991), we predicted a
general bias in which high dominance would be associated with
facilitated processing along the vertical dimension of space relative to the horizontal dimension of space. This prediction was
systematically conﬁrmed in two studies, using two spatial attention
tasks and two measures of personality dominance.

50
0
–50
–100
–150
–3

–2

–1

0

1

2

3

Z-Scored Dominance

Verticality Residual Scores
(Milliseconds)

60
40
20
0
–20
–40
–60
–3

–2

–1

0

1

2

3

Z-Scored Dominance
Fig. 2. Scatter plots of the relation between personality dominance and
residual verticality scores in the random-location (top panel) and predictable-location (bottom panel) tasks in Study 2.

spatial attention biases relative to those generally reported in
the literature (Klein, 2000).
Discussion
Study 2 replicated the systematic relation between personality
dominance and biases favoring vertical, relative to horizontal,
spatial locations in a paradigm in which the location of spatial
probes varied randomly. Study 2 also extended the results of
Study 1 by showing that dominance predicts speed of responding
to vertical spatial probes even when the location of the probes is
perfectly predictable. The latter result suggests that individuals
high in dominance not only favor vertical locations more than
other individuals, but also are more capable of shifting attention
vertically when expectancies for probe location are held constant
across individuals. Finally, Study 2 replicated the relation between
personality dominance and attention to the vertical dimension of
space using a second measure of personality dominance, one that
follows from a longer research tradition than our ﬁrst measure and
is related to circumplex models of individual differences in interpersonal functioning (Wiggins, 1979).

Volume 19—Number 4

Implications and Future Research
Our results are important in a number of ways. First, it appears
that personality-related dominance, in addition to stimulusrelated dominance (e.g., Schubert, 2005), can be usefully understood in terms of vertical metaphoric processes. The importance
of this process-oriented framework is highlighted by the fact that
the literature on personality-related dominance has primarily
focused on measuring this trait, rather than understanding how it
functions in interactions with the world (for a review, see Wiggins,
1996). Thus, it has been stated that researchers’ social-cognitive
understanding of the correlates of personality dominance is perhaps underspeciﬁed and that more research of the type we have
reported here is important to understanding the cognitive processes associated with individual differences in trait dominance
(Moskowitz, 2004; Moskowitz & Zuroff, 2005).
Second, our results are important because they are among the
ﬁrst to link personality differences to metaphor-consistent representational biases. Such ﬁndings suggest that embodiment
frameworks in general, and metaphor-representation frameworks in particular, can be proﬁtably extended to understanding
the processing basis of personality traits, hitherto a largely underresearched area in the literature on embodied cognition
(Lakoff, 1986; Meier & Robinson, 2005).
Third, our ﬁndings are important because they suggest that
metaphoric biases need not involve stimulus factors suggestive
of metaphor, such as stimulus affect (Meier & Robinson, 2004)
or stimulus dominance (Schubert, 2005). Rather, our results

359

Dominance and Use of the Vertical Dimension

suggest that more general metaphoric biases may be observed,
even in tasks in which the stimuli convey no social meaning.
In connection with this point, we emphasize the beneﬁts of an
individual differences approach, which can uncover metaphoric
biases in the absence of manipulations of conceptual information. Findings such as these will be useful to social-personality
perspectives emphasizing the unconditional nature of automatic
processing (Bargh, 1997).
Extending this general personality-related perspective to
additional metaphoric biases will also be quite useful. For
example, negative evaluations bias perceptions of font color in
a ‘‘darker’’ direction (Meier et al., 2007). From these ﬁndings, it
seems likely to us that a personal tendency toward negative
affect, too, might bias perceptual processes in a dark direction,
but such results have not been reported to date. The individual
differences approach constitutes uncharted territory in theories
of metaphor and comprehension (Lakoff, 1986), and we believe
that this approach might also reveal important new insights
concerning the processing basis of personality (Meier & Robinson, 2005).
A considerable body of research links high levels of trait
anxiety to spatial attention biases favoring threatening stimuli
(for a review, see MacLeod, 1999). These ﬁndings have been
interpreted to suggest that anxious individuals, at some level,
want to attend to threatening stimuli because they are viewed as
goal relevant (Fox, Russo, Bowles, & Dutton, 2001; Matthews &
Wells, 2000). Our data support this top-down perspective on
spatial attention (Pashler, 1998) and suggest the need for greater
consideration of personality-linked effects on top-down spatial
attention processes.

Conclusions
A metaphor-related theory led us to predict that individuals high
in dominance would favor vertical locations in visual space. Two
studies involving three replications support this prediction. Our
ﬁndings signiﬁcantly extend the metaphor-representation framework to personality variables and to cognitive tasks that seem, on
the surface, to possess few implications for representational meaning. On the basis of these results, we suggest that the metaphorrepresentation perspective may offer important insights concerning personality traits, even in the case of very mundane cognitive
tasks.

REFERENCES
Bargh, J.A. (1997). The automaticity of everyday life. In R.S. Wyer
(Ed.), The automaticity of everyday life (pp. 1–61). Mahwah, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Burgoon, J.K., Johnson, M.L., & Koch, P.T. (1998). The nature and
measurement of interpersonal dominance. Communication Monographs, 65, 308–335.

360

Fiske, A.P. (1992). The four elementary forms of sociality: Framework
for a uniﬁed theory of social relations. Psychological Review, 99,
689–723.
Fox, E., Russo, R., Bowles, R., & Dutton, K. (2001). Do threatening
stimuli draw or hold visual attention in subclinical anxiety?
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 130, 681–700.
Gibbs, R.W. (1994). The poetics of mind: Figurative thought, language,
and understanding. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University
Press.
Goldberg, L.R., Johnson, J.A., Eber, H.W., Hogan, R., Ashton, M.C.,
Cloninger, C.R., & Gough, H.G. (2006). The International Personality Item Pool and the future of public-domain personality
measures. Journal of Research in Personality, 40, 84–96.
Haslam, N. (1997). Four grammars for primate social relations. In J.A.
Simpson & D.T. Kenrick (Eds.), Evolutionary social psychology
(pp. 297–316). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Jensen, A.R. (1998). The g factor: The science of mental ability.
Westport, CT: Praeger.
Keltner, D., Gruenfeld, D.H., & Anderson, C. (2003). Power, approach,
and inhibition. Psychological Review, 110, 265–284.
Klein, R.M. (2000). Inhibition of return. Trends in Cognitive Sciences,
4, 138–147.
Kövecses, Z. (2000). Metaphor and emotion: Language, culture, and
body in human feeling. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Lakoff, G. (1986). A ﬁgure of thought. Metaphor and Symbolic Activity,
1, 215–225.
Lakoff, G., & Johnson, M. (1999). Philosophy in the ﬂesh: The embodied
mind and its challenge to Western thought. New York: Basic
Books.
MacLeod, C. (1999). Anxiety and anxiety disorders. In T. Dalgleish
& M.J. Power (Eds.), Handbook of cognition and emotion (pp.
447–477). New York: John Wiley & Sons.
Matthews, G., & Wells, A. (2000). Attention, automaticity, and affective disorder. Behavior Modiﬁcation, 24, 69–93.
Meier, B.P., & Robinson, M.D. (2004). Why the sunny side is up:
Associations between affect and vertical position. Psychological
Science, 15, 243–247.
Meier, B.P., & Robinson, M.D. (2005). The metaphorical representation of affect. Metaphor and Symbol, 20, 239–257.
Meier, B.P., Robinson, M.D., Crawford, L.E., & Ahlvers, W.J. (2007).
When ‘light’ and ‘dark’ thoughts become light and dark responses:
Affect biases brightness judgments. Emotion, 7, 366–376.
Moskowitz, D.S. (2004). Does elevated power lead to approach and
reduced power lead to inhibition? Comment on Keltner, Gruenfeld,
and Anderson (2003). Psychological Review, 111, 808–811.
Moskowitz, D.S., & Zuroff, D.C. (2005). Assessing interpersonal perceptions using the interpersonal grid. Psychological Assessment,
17, 218–230.
Niedenthal, P.M., Barsalou, L.W., Winkielman, P., Krauth-Gruber, S.,
& Ric, F. (2005). Embodiment in attitudes, social perception,
and emotion. Personality and Social Psychology Review, 9, 184–
211.
Pashler, H. (1998). The psychology of attention. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Posner, M.I. (1978). Chronometric explorations of mind. Hillsdale, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Robinson, M.D. (2007). Lives lived in milliseconds: Using cognitive
methods in personality research. In R.W. Robins, R.C. Fraley, &
R. Krueger (Eds.), Handbook of research methods in personality
psychology (pp. 345–359). New York: Guilford Press.

Volume 19—Number 4

Sara K. Moeller, Michael D. Robinson, and Darya L. Zabelina

Robinson, M.D., & Neighbors, C. (2006). Catching the mind in action:
Implicit methods in personality research and assessment. In M.
Eid & E. Diener (Eds.), Handbook of multimethod measurement in
psychology (pp. 115–125). Washington, DC: American Psychological Association Press.
Robinson, M.D., & Oishi, S. (2006). Trait self-report as a ‘‘ﬁll in’’ belief
system: Categorization speed moderates the extraversion/life
satisfaction relation. Self and Identity, 5, 15–34.
Schubert, T.W. (2005). Your highness: Vertical positions as perceptual
symbols of power. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
89, 1–21.
Schwartz, B. (1981). Vertical classiﬁcation: A study in structuralism and
the sociology of knowledge. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Volume 19—Number 4

Tolaas, J. (1991). Notes on the origin of some spatialization metaphors.
Metaphor and Symbolic Activity, 6, 203–218.
Wiggins, J.S. (1979). A psychological taxonomy of trait-descriptive
terms: The interpersonal domain. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 37, 395–412.
Wiggins, J.S. (1996). An informal history of the interpersonal
circumplex tradition. Journal of Personality Assessment, 66, 217–
233.

(RECEIVED 7/3/07; REVISION ACCEPTED 9/19/07)

361

