PS YC HOLOGICA L SC IENCE

Research Article

Conflict-Triggered Goal Shielding
Response Conflicts Attenuate Background Monitoring for
Prospective Memory Cues
Thomas Goschke and Gesine Dreisbach
Technische Universität Dresden

ABSTRACT—Action

control in a changing environment requires that one shield current goals from distracting information (goal shielding) and at the same time monitor the
environment for potentially significant stimuli that may
afford a goal switch (background monitoring). Response
conflicts modulate the balance between goal shielding and
background monitoring, as indicated by reduced susceptibility to interference after response conflicts. Such conflict-adaptation effects have been attributed to enhanced
recruitment of cognitive control on trials following conflicts. Here we show that conflict triggers increased goal
shielding on the conflict trial itself. Subjects performed a
spatial compatibility task during which they had to notice
rare prospective memory cues. Such cues were overlooked
more often on conflict trials than on nonconflict trials, a
result indicating that shielding of the current goal and
inhibition of distractors were increased on the current trial
when it involved a response conflict. Thus, evidence for
enhanced recruitment of control following conflict may
partly reflect aftereffects of goal shielding on the conflict
trial itself.
Goal-directed behavior in a changing environment requires a
context-sensitive balance between two antagonistic challenges:
On the one hand, goals must be shielded from interference, and
distracting information should be inhibited (goal shielding); on
the other hand, the environment must be monitored for potentially significant information that may afford a goal switch, as
when, for instance, one notices the smell of fire while preparing a
talk (background monitoring). Goal shielding and background
monitoring incur complementary benefits and costs: Whereas goal shielding prevents interference, it increases the risk of

Address correspondence to Thomas Goschke, Department of Psychology, Technische Universität Dresden, 01062 Dresden, Germany,
e-mail: goschke@psychologie.tu-dresden.de.

Volume 19—Number 1

overlooking significant information. Conversely, whereas background monitoring facilitates noticing task-irrelevant but potentially significant stimuli, it increases susceptibility to interference (Dreisbach, 2006; Dreisbach & Goschke, 2004). This
shielding-monitoring dilemma raises the central question of how
organisms regulate the trade-off between these antagonistic
constraints in a context-sensitive manner (Goschke, 1996,
2000, 2003; cf. Altmann & Trafton, 2002; Aston-John & Cohen,
2005; Mayr & Keele, 2000).
According to an influential hypothesis, response conflicts
play a central role in context-sensitive adjustments of cognitive control processes. In particular, conflicts are assumed to
trigger enhanced mobilization of cognitive control to prevent
interference on subsequent trials in a task (Botvinick, Braver,
Barch, Carter, & Cohen, 2001; Botvinick, Cohen, & Carter,
2004; see also Ach, 1935; Kuhl, 1985). Studies consistent
with this hypothesis have shown that interference from distractors in speeded choice reaction tasks is reduced on trials
following response-incompatible (high-conflict) trials, compared with trials following response-compatible (low-conflict)
trials (Botvinick, Nystrom, Fissell, Carter, & Cohen, 1999;
Gratton, Coles, & Donchin, 1992). Such conflict-adaptation
effects suggest that response conflicts induce enhanced target
processing, distractor suppression, or both on the following
trial (but see Mayr, Awh, & Laurey, 2003). According to the
conflict-monitoring theory proposed by Botvinick et al. (2001),
the anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) in the medial frontal
lobe monitors response conflicts and signals the demand
for increased control to the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (PFC),
which is thought to support active maintenance of goal representations and top-down modulation of lower-level processing modules (Miller & Cohen, 2001; Ridderinkhof, Ullsperger,
Crone, & Nieuwenhuis, 2004). In a study consistent with
this theory, conflict-related brain activity in the ACC during a
Stroop color-naming task predicted greater activity in lateral
PFC, as well as behavioral adjustments on the next trial (Kerns
et al., 2004).

Copyright r 2008 Association for Psychological Science

25

Conflict Monitoring and Goal Shielding

Whereas previous studies focused on increased recruitment of
control following conflict, in the study reported here, we investigated whether conflicts also lead to on-line adjustments of
control on the current trial. Specifically, we tested the hypothesis
that response conflict triggers increased activation of the currently active goal and enhanced inhibition of concurrent distractors on the very trial on which the conflict arises. This
conflict-triggered goal-shielding hypothesis predicts that conflicts in an ongoing task increase the risk of overlooking significant stimuli that are not relevant for the ongoing task, but
afford a switch to an alternative goal.
To test this prediction, we examined how response conflicts in
an ongoing task affect the detection of concurrent prospective
memory (PM) cues. PM denotes memory for future intentions
that must be executed at some later time or in response to a
specific cue (e.g., buying bread when one passes the bakery on
one’s way home; for reviews, see Ellis, 1996; Marsh, Cook, &
Hicks, 2006; McDaniel & Einstein, 2000). In a typical PM experiment, subjects perform an ongoing task during which they
have to notice rarely occurring PM cues requiring a response
different from that required by the ongoing task. In our experiment, the ongoing task was a spatial compatibility task, in which
subjects had to respond either to the direction or to the location
of an arrow that pointed in one of four directions and appeared at
one of four locations. In addition, subjects were instructed to
press the space bar whenever they noticed the PM cue. In
different blocks, the PM cue was defined either as any arrow
appearing at a particular location (i.e., below the fixation point),
regardless of the direction of the arrow, or as any arrow pointing
in a particular direction (i.e., downward), regardless of its location. Critically, the PM cues were either spatially incompatible stimuli (e.g., a downward-pointing arrow at an upper
location), which induced a response conflict with respect to the
response rules of the ongoing task, or spatially compatible
stimuli, which induced no response conflict.
We predicted that PM cues would be overlooked (i.e., not
acted upon) more often on high- than on low-conflict trials because on high-conflict trials the current goal (i.e., to perform the
ongoing task) is automatically shielded from distracting information. We assumed that this effect would not merely reflect
generally increased task difficulty on incompatible trials, but
would be due to conflict-triggered inhibition of distracting
stimulus dimensions. We therefore predicted that the detrimental effect of conflicts on the detection of PM cues would be
significantly larger for PM cues defined by the task-irrelevant stimulus dimension than for PM cues defined by the task-relevant
dimension of the ongoing task.
METHOD

Subjects
Subjects were 40 undergraduates from Dresden University of
Technology, Germany. They received course credit or were paid h5.

26

Procedure
Subjects were informed that we were investigating retrieval of
intentions during an ongoing task. Each trial of the ongoing task
started with a fixation cross (400 ms), followed by a blank screen
(400 ms). Next, an arrow pointing leftward, rightward, upward,
or downward appeared at one of four locations (to the left, to the
right, above, or below a central fixation point; see Fig. 1). The
combination of locations and arrows yielded 16 stimuli (4 spatially compatible and 12 incompatible, as explained later in
this section). Half of the subjects were instructed to indicate
the direction of the arrows by pressing one of four response keys
with their index finger; the location of the arrows was irrelevant
to the responses of these subjects. The remaining 20 subjects
indicated the location of the arrows by pressing one of the
four response keys; for these subjects, the direction of the arrows
was irrelevant to their responses (response keys were arranged to
be spatially compatible to the arrows’ locations and directions).
We term these tasks the arrow task and the location task,
respectively.
In addition, subjects were instructed that on some trials,
a PM cue would appear, and that this cue required a different
response (pressing the space bar). There were two different types
of PM cues. In half of the blocks, the PM cue was any arrow
appearing at a particular location (i.e., below the fixation point),
regardless of the direction in which the arrow pointed. In the
remaining blocks, the PM cue was any arrow pointing in a
particular direction (downward), regardless of its location.
We term these location PM cues and arrow PM cues, respectively.
Each subject in each of the two ongoing-task groups (i.e., those
performing the arrow task and those performing the location
task) received a total of six blocks, three with arrow PM cues
and three with location PM cues (order of blocks was counterbalanced across subjects). Thus, in half of the blocks, the PM
cue was defined by the response-relevant stimulus dimension
of the ongoing task (i.e., subjects had to notice location PM cues
while performing the location task or they had to notice arrow
PM cues during the arrow task), and in the other half of
the blocks, the PM cue was defined by the response-irrelevant
dimension of the ongoing task (i.e., subjects had to notice
arrow PM cues during the location task or location PM cues
during the arrow task). We term this variable PM-cue dimension.
Note that when PM cues were defined by the task-relevant
stimulus dimension, the ongoing task involved three response
alternatives, whereas when the PM cues were defined by
the task-irrelevant dimension, the ongoing task involved four
response alternatives.
Each block contained a total of 204 trials. Of these, 192 were
regular trials, on which the arrow’s direction and location were
selected at random, with the constraint that the stimulus was not
a PM cue. Twenty-five percent of the regular trials were spatially
compatible trials (e.g., a left-pointing arrow appearing at the left
location), and 75% were spatially incompatible trials (e.g., a
left-pointing arrow appearing at the right location).

Volume 19—Number 1

Thomas Goschke and Gesine Dreisbach

Fig. 1. Examples of different trial types in the combined spatial compatibility and prospective memory
(PM) task. Stimuli were leftward-, rightward-, upward-, and downward-pointing arrows appearing to
the left, to the right, above, or below the central fixation point. In the ongoing task (regular trials),
participants responded either to the directions of the arrows (as in the examples shown here) or to the
locations of the arrows. PM cues were defined (in different blocks) either as any arrow appearing below
the fixation point, regardless of its direction (as in the examples on the right), or as any arrow pointing
downward, regardless of its location (as in the examples on the left). Thus, PM cues were defined either
by the response-relevant or by the response-irrelevant stimulus dimension of the ongoing task. Some
regular trials were PM-related trials, on which the stimulus was not the actual PM cue, but was semantically related to that cue (i.e., a downward-pointing arrow at the top, right, or left location when
the PM cue was defined as an arrow in the bottom location, or a leftward-, rightward-, or upwardpointing arrow at the bottom location when the PM cue was defined as a downward-pointing arrow).

Each block also contained 6 PM trials, trials on which
a PM cue appeared. PM trials were inserted at random positions
with the constraint that these trials were separated by a
minimum of 11 and a maximum of 66 intervening regular
trials. Critically, 3 of the PM cues were instantiated by compatible stimuli (i.e., a downward-pointing arrow appearing
below the fixation point), whereas the other 3 PM cues were
instantiated by incompatible stimuli eliciting a response conflict
(i.e., a downward-pointing arrow appearing at some location
other than below the fixation point or an arrow appearing below
the fixation point, but pointing in some direction other than
downward).
In addition, 6 trials with deviant stimuli (e.g., a cross instead
of an arrow) appeared in each block. These trials were originally
included to explore effects of rare deviants on reaction time
(RT), but they are not related to the topic of this article and are
not discussed further.
Note that the stimulus on approximately 25% of the incompatible regular trials was semantically related to the PM cue
(i.e., a downward-pointing arrow at the top, right, or left location
was semantically related to the PM cue when the PM cue was an

Volume 19—Number 1

arrow in the bottom location, and a leftward-, rightward-, or
upward-pointing arrow at the bottom location was semantically
related to the PM cue when the PM cue was a downward-pointing
arrow). We term these trials PM-related trials. Although this was
not our main focus, we investigated whether PM-related trials,
because of their semantic relatedness to the actual PM cues,
automatically captured attention and therefore incurred a performance cost in the ongoing task.
To summarize, our task included compatible and incompatible regular trials (including incompatible PM-related trials) and
compatible and incompatible PM trials (see Fig. 1).

Design
The independent variables were (a) ongoing task (arrow direction vs. arrow location), (b) compatibility (compatible vs. incompatible), (c) trial type (regular vs. PM), and (d) PM cue
dimension (response-relevant vs. response-irrelevant stimulus
dimension for the ongoing task). Apart from ongoing task, all
variables were varied within subjects.

27

Conflict Monitoring and Goal Shielding

Predictions
Predictions for the Ongoing Task
For the ongoing task, we predicted that spatially incompatible
stimuli would elicit a response conflict, which would be reflected
in increased RTs and error rates relative to those on compatible
trials. Furthermore, because a pilot study indicated that the
location task is the dominant task and produces generally faster
RTs than the arrow task, we predicted a stronger compatibility
effect in the (nondominant) arrow task than in the (dominant)
location task. An ancillary prediction was that RTs in the ongoing task would be generally increased when the PM cues were
defined by the task-irrelevant dimension, because in this case
the ongoing task involved four responses, whereas it involved
three responses when PM cues were defined by the task-relevant
dimension.
Prediction for the PM Task
For the PM task, we predicted an interaction of compatibility
and PM cue dimension. Specifically, we expected that PM cues
would be missed more often on incompatible than on compatible
trials, and that this effect would be significantly stronger for PM
cues defined by the task-irrelevant dimension than for PM cues
defined by the task-relevant dimension. Note that such an interactive effect would be independent of any main effects of PM
cue dimension. In particular, as the ongoing task comprised four
responses when PM cues were defined by the task-irrelevant
dimension but only three response alternatives when PM cues
were defined by the task-relevant dimension, the ongoing task
was presumably slightly more demanding in the former case,
which might generally impair the detection of PM cues defined
by the task-irrelevant dimension. However, this main effect
would not affect the critical predicted interaction between PM
cue dimension and compatibility.
Prediction for PM-Related Stimuli
Finally, we predicted that PM-related stimuli—because of their
semantic relatedness to the PM cues—would capture attention
and eventually trigger retrieval of the associated intention. This
was expected to delay responses in the ongoing task (relative to
incompatible regular trials on which the stimulus was unrelated
to the PM cues) because of a time-consuming rechecking of
whether or not the stimulus was actually a PM cue.
RESULTS

We first report analyses testing our predictions for regular trials
in the ongoing task, then turn to analyses of the PM task, and
finally discuss results for PM-related trials.
Regular Trials in the Ongoing Task
Trials with incorrect responses, trials with RTs below 200 ms,
and trials with RTs 3 standard deviations or more above a sub-

28

ject’s mean RT were excluded. We computed means of the remaining RTs for each combination of ongoing task, compatibility, trial type, and PM cue dimension (data were collapsed
over the three blocks with the arrow PM cue and over the three
blocks with the location PM cue). Mean RT on regular trials (see
Fig. 2) served as the dependent variable in a mixed analysis of
variance (ANOVA) with ongoing task (arrow vs. location) as a
between-subjects variable and compatibility (compatible vs.
incompatible) and PM cue dimension (task-relevant vs. taskirrelevant) as within-subjects variables. This analysis yielded a
highly reliable main effect of compatibility, F(1, 38) 5 70.14,
prep 5 .986, Z 5 .65, which was qualified by a reliable interaction of compatibility and ongoing task, F(1, 38) 5 15.58, prep 5
.986, Z 5 .29. As predicted, mean RTwas longer on incompatible
than on compatible trials, and this effect was larger for the
(nondominant) arrow task than for the (dominant) location task.
Moreover, there was a reliable effect of PM cue dimension, F(1,
38) 5 35.51, prep 5 .986, Z 5 .48, and a reliable interaction of
PM cue dimension and compatibility, F(1, 38) 5 5.89, prep 5
.927, Z 5 .13. RT in the ongoing task was generally increased,
and the effect of compatibility was slightly larger (38 vs. 28 ms),
when the PM cues were defined by the task-irrelevant dimension
than when they were defined by the task-relevant dimension.
Error rates were very low (on average, below 2%; see Fig. 2)
and generally mirrored the RT data. A mixed ANOVA with ongoing task, compatibility, and PM cue dimension as independent
variables yielded a highly reliable main effect of compatibility,
F(1, 38) 5 26.40, prep 5 .986, Z 5 .41, which was qualified by a
reliable interaction of compatibility and ongoing task, F(1,
38) 5 11.42, prep 5 .979, Z 5 .23. Error rates were higher on
incompatible than on compatible trials, especially in the (nondominant) arrow task. Moreover, the effect of PM cue dimension
was reliable, F(1, 38) 5 10.47, prep 5 .878, Z 5 .22, reflecting
slightly higher error rates when the PM task required monitoring
the task-relevant, rather than the task-irrelevant, dimension
(1.02% vs. 0.65%, respectively).

PM Task
To test our critical prediction for the PM task, we examined
effects of spatial compatibility on PM task performance (see Fig.
3). Response to a PM trial was considered correct if the subject
pressed the space bar in response to the PM cue, and was considered an omission if the subject pressed one of the keys assigned to the ongoing task.
The mean proportion of missed PM cues served as the dependent variable in an ANOVA with the independent variables
of PM cue dimension (task-relevant vs. task-irrelevant), ongoing
task (location vs. arrow), and compatibility (compatible vs. incompatible). This analysis yielded reliable effects of compatibility, F(1, 38) 5 18.19, prep 5 .986, Z 5 .32, and PM cue
dimension, F(1, 38) 5 49.85, prep 5 .986, Z 5 .57, indicating
that PM cues were missed more often when they appeared on

Volume 19—Number 1

Thomas Goschke and Gesine Dreisbach

Fig. 2. Mean reaction times and error rates in the ongoing task for trials with spatially compatible
stimuli, spatially incompatible stimuli that were unrelated to the prospective memory cue, and spatially
incompatible stimuli that were semantically related to the prospective memory cue. Results are shown
separately for blocks with arrow prospective memory cues and location prospective memory cues (arrow
task on the left, location task on the right).

incompatible rather than compatible trials, and when they referred to the response-irrelevant rather than the response-relevant dimension of the ongoing task. Moreover, the interaction of
these two variables was reliable, F(1, 38) 5 6.21, prep 5 .927,
Z 5 .14, reflecting the fact that the detrimental effect of incompatibility on the detection of PM cues was markedly larger
for PM cues referring to the task-irrelevant dimension than for
PM cues referring to the task-relevant dimension.1

PM-Related Trials in the Ongoing Task
To test our prediction for the PM-related trials, we compared
mean RTs for PM-related trials (i.e., incompatible regular trials
on which the stimulus was semantically related to the PM cue)
with mean RTs for incompatible regular trials on which the
stimulus was semantically unrelated to the PM cue. A 2  2  2
1
RTs in the PM task mirrored error data. Specifically, mean RT was reliably
longer on incompatible than on compatible PM trials. Because of the small
number of observations (fewer than 6 for some subjects), no statistical analyses
of RT on the PM task are reported.

Volume 19—Number 1

ANOVA with the independent variables of trial type (incompatible regular vs. incompatible PM-related), PM cue dimension
(task-relevant vs. task-irrelevant), and ongoing task (arrow vs.
location) yielded highly reliable main effects of trial type, F(1,
37) 5 105.34, prep 5 .986, Z 5 .74, and PM cue dimension, F(1,
37) 5 157.24, prep 5 .986, Z 5 .81, which were qualified by a
highly reliable interaction of these two variables, F(1, 37) 5
75.08, prep 5 .986, Z 5 .67. RT was increased on PM-related
relative to incompatible regular trials, and this increase was
larger when the PM cues referred to the response-irrelevant
rather than the response-relevant stimulus dimension of the
ongoing task (Fig. 2).
The corresponding error rates were low and mirrored the RT
data (Fig. 2). Error rates were slightly increased on PM-related
relative to incompatible regular trials, but only if the PM cues
referred to the response-irrelevant dimension. A 2 (trial type:
incompatible regular vs. PM-related)  2 (PM cue dimension:
task-relevant vs. task-irrelevant)  2 (ongoing task: arrow vs.
location) ANOVA yielded reliable main effects of trial type,
F(1, 38) 5 11.88, prep 5 .986, Z 5 .24, and PM cue dimension,
F(1, 38) 5 11.48, prep 5 .95, Z 5 .23, as well as a highly reliable

29

Conflict Monitoring and Goal Shielding

Fig. 3. Percentage of compatible and incompatible trials on which subjects mistakenly failed to act upon prospective memory cues, as a function
of the ongoing task (arrow vs. location) and whether the prospective
memory cue referred to the response-relevant or response-irrelevant
stimulus dimension of the ongoing task. Error bars indicate  1 SE.

interaction of the two variables, F(1, 38) 5 19.41, prep 5 .986,
Z 5 .34.
GENERAL DISCUSSION

Conflict-Triggered Goal Shielding
In this study, we investigated whether response conflicts trigger
enhanced shielding of the currently active goal and inhibition of
concurrent distracting information. Results were consistent with
our goal-shielding hypothesis. Response conflicts induced by
spatially incompatible stimuli in an ongoing task impaired detection of concurrent PM cues: PM cues were overlooked significantly more often when they appeared on incompatible
rather than on compatible trials, and this effect was much larger
when the PM cues were defined by the task-irrelevant (and thus
potentially distracting) rather than the task-relevant stimulus
dimension of the ongoing task.
The interaction between compatibility and PM cue dimension
rules out an alternative interpretation according to which PM
cues were missed more often on incompatible trials not because
of increased goal shielding, but rather because their memory
representation received less informational input. According to
this interpretation, the representation of the PM cue on compatible trials (e.g., the PM cue of a downward-pointing arrow
appearing at the bottom location) received input activation from
both the location and the direction of the arrow. By contrast, the
representation of the PM cue on incompatible trials (e.g., the PM
cue of the downward-pointing arrow appearing at the top, left, or
right location) was activated only by the direction of the arrow,
and not by its location. However, according to this coactivation
hypothesis, PM cue representations should have received less
activation on incompatible than on compatible trials irrespec-

30

tive of whether the PM cue referred to the task-relevant or the
task-irrelevant dimension. Contrary to this prediction, but fully
consistent with our goal-shielding hypothesis, the detrimental
effect of incompatibility on PM detection was reliably larger for
PM cues referring to the task-irrelevant dimension.
This finding also rules out a second alternative interpretation
according to which incompatible trials were simply more difficult than compatible trials, so that processing resources remaining for the PM task were reduced. Although there is in fact
evidence that increased processing demands in an ongoing task
impair PM performance (Marsh, Hancock, & Hicks, 2002), a
general increase in task difficulty should have impaired PM
performance irrespective of whether the PM cues referred to the
task-relevant or task-irrelevant dimension. Thus, this interpretation cannot explain why incompatibility had a much stronger
effect on the detection of PM cues referring to the task-irrelevant
dimension (unless one assumes that increased difficulty triggered increased activation of the current goal or inhibition of
task-irrelevant information, which amounts to a reformulation of
the goal-shielding hypothesis).
In conclusion, our findings provide strong support for conflicttriggered goal shielding and indicate that conflicts triggered
increased shielding of the currently active goal and attenuated
background monitoring for task-irrelevant, but potentially significant, stimuli. There are two possible mechanisms that may
have underlain the effect of goal shielding on PM performance.
On the one hand, goal shielding may have directly attenuated
active monitoring for PM cues. This possibility fits with theories
assuming that detecting PM cues requires controlled monitoring that taxes attentional resources (Burgess & Shallice, 1997;
Guynn, 2003; Smith, 2003). Alternatively, inhibition of the PM
task set and the memory representation of the PM cue could have
reduced the likelihood that PM cues would automatically trigger
retrieval of the associated intention. This account fits with theories assuming that PM cues trigger retrieval of the associated
intention by way of reflexive-associative memory processes
(Guynn, McDaniel, & Einstein, 2001; McDaniel & Einstein,
2000; McDaniel, Guynn, Einstein, & Breneiser, 2004). Note that
these explanations are not mutually exclusive, and there is evidence that both active monitoring and automatic retrieval play a
role in PM (Einstein et al., 2005).

Effects of the PM Task on Performance in the Ongoing Task
Although this was not our main focus, our design allowed us to
examine effects of the PM task on the ongoing task. As predicted, RT increased on PM-related trials, indicating that
stimuli that were semantically related to the PM cue captured
attention and occasionally triggered retrieval of the intention
associated with the PM cue, which presumably resulted in a
time-consuming rechecking of whether or not the stimulus was
actually the PM cue. This finding fits with previous evidence that
semantic representations of uncompleted intentions persist in a

Volume 19—Number 1

Thomas Goschke and Gesine Dreisbach

state of heightened activation and automatically draw attention
to intention-related cues (Goschke & Kuhl, 1993, 1996; Marsh,
Hicks, & Bink, 1998).
We also found generally increased RT in the ongoing task
when the PM cue to be noticed referred to the task-irrelevant,
rather than the task-relevant, stimulus dimension. This finding
suggests that monitoring for PM cues incurred a cost in the
ongoing task. Although this interpretation fits with studies
showing that a PM task may slow responses in an ongoing task
when attention must be divided between the two tasks (Marsh et
al., 2002; Marsh, Hicks, & Cook, 2005; Smith, 2003), the RT
increase could also reflect the fact that the ongoing task involved
four responses when PM cues referred to the task-irrelevant
dimension, compared with three responses when PM cues referred to the task-relevant dimension.

Implications for Theories of Conflict Monitoring and
Cognitive Control
In important ways, our findings extend current theories of conflict monitoring and cognitive control. Whereas to date virtually
all studies have focused on effects of response conflicts on the
mobilization of cognitive control on the next trial of a task (e.g.,
Botvinick et al., 1999; Gratton et al., 1992; Kerns et al., 2004),
our results show that conflicts also induce increased goal
shielding and distractor inhibition on the current trial. A distinct
advantage of our paradigm is that it circumvents some of the
ambiguities of studies in which conflict-adaptation effects
were inferred from sequential compatibility effects, which are
open to alternative interpretations in terms of episodic priming (Mayr et al., 2003). Although the exact mechanisms underlying conflict-triggered goal shielding remain to be elucidated, our findings are consistent with models assuming that
goal shielding and distractor inhibition are by-products of conflict monitoring during response selection (cf. Botvinick et al.,
2001; Schuch & Koch, 2003). For instance, the connectionist
model of Botvinick et al. (2001) contains a conflict-monitoring
unit that computes a measure (termed ‘‘energy’’) indicating the
degree to which incompatible responses are activated simultaneously. As this measure is continuously updated during response selection, it may well serve to adjust on-line the
activation of the current goal representation in working memory.
As a consequence, task-specific processing pathways would
receive stronger top-down bias signals from the current goal
representation, whereas task-irrelevant representations might
be suppressed as a by-product of local competition and lateral
inhibition, so that background monitoring would be attenuated
(cf. Miller & Cohen, 2001).
To conclude, our results provide strong evidence that response conflicts play an important role in the context-sensitive
modulation of the balance between goal shielding and background monitoring. In particular, to the best of our knowledge,
this is the first evidence that a response conflict not only induces

Volume 19—Number 1

enhanced recruitment of cognitive control on the following trial,
but may also trigger enhanced shielding of the active goal on the
current trial. An important implication of this finding is that
some of the findings that have previously been interpreted as
evidence for enhanced recruitment of control on trials following
a conflict may instead reflect aftereffects of increased goal
shielding on the current conflict trial.
Acknowledgments—This research was supported by the German Research Foundation (Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft;
Grant Go 720/3-3). We thank Friederike Engst and Annette
Bolte for valuable comments on this article and Romy Müller for
assistance in running the experiment.
REFERENCES
Ach, N. (1935). Analyse des Willens (Handbuch der biologischen Arbeitsmethoden Vol. 6, E. Abderhalden, Series Ed.). Berlin, Germany: Urban & Schwarzenberg.
Altmann, E.M., & Trafton, J.G. (2002). Memory for goals: An activation-based model. Cognitive Science, 26, 39–83.
Aston-John, G., & Cohen, J.D. (2005). An integrative theory of locus
coeruleus-norepinephrine function: Adaptive gain and optimal
performance. Annual Review of Neuroscience, 28, 403–450.
Botvinick, M., Nystrom, L.E., Fissell, K., Carter, C.S., & Cohen, J.D.
(1999). Conflict monitoring versus selection-for-action in anterior
cingulate cortex. Nature, 402, 179–181.
Botvinick, M.M., Braver, T.S., Barch, D.M., Carter, C.S., & Cohen, J.D.
(2001). Conflict monitoring and cognitive control. Psychological
Review, 108, 624–652.
Botvinick, M.M., Cohen, J.D., & Carter, C. (2004). Conflict monitoring
and anterior cingulate cortex: An update. Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 8, 539–546.
Burgess, P.W., & Shallice, T. (1997). The relationship between prospective and retrospective memory: Neuropsychological evidence. In M.A. Conway (Ed.), Cognitive models of memory (pp.
247–272). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Dreisbach, G. (2006). How positive affect modulates cognitive control:
The costs and benefits of reduced maintenance capability. Brain
& Cognition, 60, 11–19.
Dreisbach, G., & Goschke, T. (2004). How positive affect modulates
cognitive control: Reduced perseveration at the cost of increased
distractibility. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 30, 343–353.
Einstein, G.O., McDaniel, M.A., Thomas, R., Mayfield, S., Shank, H.,
Morrisette, N., & Breneiser, J. (2005). Multiple processes in
prospective memory retrieval: Factors determining monitoring
versus spontaneous retrieval. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 134, 327–342.
Ellis, J.A. (1996). Prospective memory or the realization of delayed
intentions: A conceptual framework for research. In M. Brandimonte, G. Einstein, & M. McDaniel (Eds.), Prospective memory:
Theory and applications (pp. 1–22). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Goschke, T. (1996). Wille und Kognition: Zur funktionalen Architektur
der intentionalen Handlungssteuerung [Volition and cognition:
Towards a functional architecture of intentional action control].
In H. Heckhausen & J. Kuhl (Eds.), Motivation, Volition, Handlung: Enzyklopädie der Psychologie (pp. 583–663). Göttingen,
Germany: Hogrefe.

31

Conflict Monitoring and Goal Shielding

Goschke, T. (2000). Involuntary persistence and intentional reconfiguration in task-set switching. In S. Monsell & J. Driver (Eds.),
Attention and performance XVIII: Control of cognitive processes
(pp. 331–355). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Goschke, T. (2003). Voluntary action and cognitive control from a
cognitive neuroscience perspective. In S. Maasen, W. Prinz, & G.
Roth (Eds.), Voluntary action: An issue at the interface of nature
and culture (pp. 49–85). Oxford, England: Oxford University
Press.
Goschke, T., & Kuhl, J. (1993). The representation of intentions:
Persisting activation in memory. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 19, 1211–1226.
Goschke, T., & Kuhl, J. (1996). Remembering what to do: Explicit and
implicit memory for intentions. In M. Brandimonte, G. Einstein,
& M. McDaniel (Eds.), Prospective memory: Theory and applications (pp. 53–91). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Gratton, G., Coles, M.G.H., & Donchin, E. (1992). Optimizing the use
of information: Strategic control of activation and responses.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 4, 480–506.
Guynn, M.J. (2003). A two-process model of strategic monitoring in
event-based prospective memory: Activation/retrieval mode and
checking. International Journal of Psychology, 38, 245–256.
Guynn, M.J., McDaniel, M.A., & Einstein, G.O. (2001). Remembering
to perform actions: A different type of memory? In H.D. Zimmer,
R.L. Cohen, M.J. Guynn, J. Engelkamp, R. Kormi-Nouri, & M.A.
Foley (Eds.), Memory for action: A distinct form of episodic
memory? (pp. 25–48). New York: Oxford University Press.
Kerns, J.G., Cohen, J.D., MacDonald, A.W., III, Cho, R.Y., Stenger,
V.A., & Carter, C.S. (2004). Anterior cingulate conflict monitoring
and adjustments in control. Science, 303, 1023–1026.
Kuhl, J. (1985). Volitional mediators of cognitive-behavior consistency: Self-regulatory processes and actions versus state orientation.
In J. Kuhl & J. Beckmann (Eds.), Action control: From cognition
to behavior (pp. 101–128). Berlin, Germany: Springer.
Marsh, R.L., Cook, G.I., & Hicks, J.L. (2006). An analysis of prospective memory. The Psychology of Learning and Motivation, 46,
115–153.
Marsh, R.L., Hancock, T.W., & Hicks, J.L. (2002). The demands of an
ongoing activity influence the success of event-based prospective
memory. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 9, 604–610.

32

Marsh, R.L., Hicks, J.L., & Bink, M.L. (1998). Activation of completed, uncompleted, and partially completed intentions. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition,
24, 350–361.
Marsh, R.L., Hicks, J.L., & Cook, G.I. (2005). On the relationship
between effort toward an ongoing task and cue detection in eventbased prospective memory. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 31, 68–75.
Mayr, U., Awh, E., & Laurey, P. (2003). Conflict adaptation effects
in the absence of executive control. Nature Neuroscience, 6,
450–452.
Mayr, U., & Keele, S.W. (2000). Changing internal constraints on
action: The role of backward inhibition. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 129, 4–26.
McDaniel, M.A., & Einstein, G.O. (2000). Strategic and automatic
processes in prospective memory retrieval: A multiprocess
framework. Applied Cognitive Psychology, 14, S127–S144.
McDaniel, M.A., Guynn, D., Einstein, G.O., & Breneiser, J. (2004).
Cue-focused and automatic-associative processes in prospective
memory retrieval. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 30, 605–614.
Miller, E., & Cohen, J. (2001). An integrative theory of prefrontal
cortex function. Annual Review of Neuroscience, 24, 167–202.
Ridderinkhof, K.R., Ullsperger, M., Crone, E.A., & Nieuwenhuis, S.
(2004). The role of the medial frontal cortex in cognitive control.
Science, 15, 443–447.
Schuch, S., & Koch, I. (2003). The role of response selection for inhibition of task sets in task shifting. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 29, 92–105.
Smith, R.E. (2003). The cost of remembering to remember in eventbased prospective memory: Investigating the capacity demands of
delayed intention performance. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 29, 347–361.

(RECEIVED 12/4/06; REVISION ACCEPTED 3/22/07)

Volume 19—Number 1

