P SY CH OL OG I C AL S CIE N CE

Short Report

The Value Heuristic in Judgments
of Relative Frequency
Xianchi Dai, Klaus Wertenbroch, and C. Miguel Brendl
INSEAD Europe Campus, Fontainebleau, France
Estimating the relative frequency of a class of objects or events
is fundamental in subjective probability assessments and decision making (Estes, 1976), and research has long shown that
people rely on heuristics for making these judgments (Gilovich,
Grifﬁn, & Kahneman, 2002). In this report, we identify a novel
heuristic for making these judgments, the value heuristic:
People judge the frequency of a class of objects on the basis of
the subjective value of the objects.
Why use object value as a cue to object frequency? A psychological and economic principle of valuation is that the
scarcity of objects increases their value (e.g., Brock, 1968;
Hirshleifer, Glazer, & Hirshleifer, 2006; McKenzie & Chase, in
press). Two different theoretical perspectives led us to hypothesize that people use this relationship to heuristically—and
inversely—infer the frequency of a class of objects from their
value. Kahneman and Frederick (2002) proposed that heuristic
judgments rely on attribute substitution: In assessing an attribute (the target attribute, e.g., the frequency of an object) that
is less readily assessed than a related property (the heuristic
attribute, e.g., the value of the object), people unwittingly substitute the simpler assessment of the heuristic attribute for the
assessment of the target attribute. This can bias judgments when
the heuristic attribute is not diagnostic of the target attribute. Yet
our proposition is also consistent with Brunswik’s (1952) notion
of probabilistic functionalism. Subjective estimates of a distal
variable rely on judgmental cues that are probabilistically related to it. Brunswik’s concept of vicarious functioning denotes
the ability to analyze several cues that are correlated with the
distal variable (e.g., frequency) and to substitute one cue (e.g.,
value) for another (e.g., ease of recall), a process that yields valid
alternative routes to the distal variable.1
If people use the value of a class of stimuli heuristically to
infer the frequency of the stimuli, they will assess more valuable
Address correspondence to Xianchi Dai, Marketing Area, INSEAD
Europe Campus, Boulevard de Constance, 77305 Fontainebleau
Cedex, France, e-mail: xianchi.dai@insead.edu.
1
See Hammond (1990) for a theoretical integration of Tversky and Kahneman’s (e.g., 1974) heuristics and biases program and Brunswik’s (e.g., 1952)
functionalism.

18

stimulus classes as being less frequent even when value is not
diagnostic of frequency. To test this hypothesis, we manipulated
the value of stimuli only after participants had encoded them;
then, participants assessed the frequencies of the stimuli. A
randomization procedure ensured that stimulus value could not
be diagnostic of frequency.
METHOD

Thirty female and 38 male Sorbonne University undergraduates
viewed a randomized sequence of 57 pictures of ﬂowers and 57
pictures of birds presented on a computer screen. We did not
reveal these frequencies. Participants then learned that they
would receive 2b for each previously seen picture from one of the
two categories (either birds or ﬂowers). To determine the endowed category, respondents ﬂipped a coin. Next, we asked them
to estimate the number of pictures in each category. To provide an
incentive for accuracy, we promised an additional h1.00 for each
estimate that fell within 5 of the actual number. Finally, participants rated whether they believed the endowed category had
been determined randomly (scale from 0, not at all, to 6, very
much). Five participants were excluded from the analysis because they misunderstood which category was endowed.
RESULTS

Because frequency estimates varied considerably (between 10
and 110), we compared the two endowment conditions (birds
endowed vs. ﬂowers endowed) to determine whether they differed in how many participants provided lower, equal, and
higher estimates of the number of endowed pictures relative to
the number of nonendowed pictures (see Fig. 1).
As predicted, participants were more likely to underestimate
the number of ﬂower pictures relative to bird pictures when they
expected payment for ﬂower pictures (15 of 31 participants,
48%) than when they expected payment for bird pictures (8 of 32
participants, 25%). In contrast, they were more likely to underestimate the number of bird pictures relative to ﬂower pictures when they expected payment for bird pictures (21 of 32
participants, 66%) than when they expected payment for ﬂower

Copyright
2008 Association
for Tech
Psychological
Science
Downloaded
fromr
pss.sagepub.com
at Virginia
on May 14, 2015

Volume 19—Number 1

Xianchi Dai, Klaus Wertenbroch, and C. Miguel Brendl

value is not the result of biased frequency encoding, but rather
reﬂects a new judgment heuristic.
Like other judgmental heuristics, the value heuristic may
improve efﬁciency—greater value is often related to greater
scarcity in everyday life, as it is the relative scarcity of objects
that determines their market price. However, the value heuristic
can also bias judgments. If people use their idiosyncratic valuations rather than market valuations to estimate the supply of
goods, they may underestimate the supply of what they personally value, which will affect their search behavior and willingness
to pay. Thus, the present demonstration of the value heuristic not
only adds to the repertoire of known judgmental heuristics, but
also suggests avenues for exploring biases in people’s economic
intuitions and in their understanding of market mechanisms.
Fig. 1. Percentage of participants who estimated that there were fewer
ﬂower pictures than bird pictures, fewer bird pictures than ﬂower pictures, and equal numbers of ﬂower and bird pictures, as a function of
which category was endowed. The numbers in boldface indicate the
number of participants in each category.

pictures (12 of 31 participants, 39%), w2(1, N 5 56) 5 4.51, p 5
.037, prep 5 .93, odds ratio 5 3.28.2 Underestimating the frequency of the endowed category was independent of perceiving
the endowment procedure to be random. Participants’ randomness ratings did not correlate with the ratio of their frequency
estimates of the endowed and the nonendowed categories
(Pearson’s r 5 –.047, N 5 63, p 5 .712).
To test the robustness of this effect of value on frequency estimates, we ran two additional experiments. In the ﬁrst, we followed the same procedure to endow value randomly, but used
simultaneously presented, meaningless letter combinations, rather than pictures, as stimuli. The results replicated those reported
here. In the second experiment, participants underestimated the
frequency of opposite-gender portraits relative to own-gender
portraits when the portraits were attractive (so that oppositegender portraits were intrinsically more desirable to look at), but
not when the portraits were not attractive. The value heuristic is
robust, regardless of whether stimuli are presented sequentially
or simultaneously, or whether stimulus value is experimentally
induced or intrinsic.
DISCUSSION

People use the value of a class of objects to infer the frequency of
that class. Our results implicate a judgment process at the
stimulus-retrieval stage, rather than at the encoding stage, because the value difference between the stimulus categories was
induced randomly only after the stimuli were presented. This
point is of theoretical importance because it implies that estimating the frequency of a class of objects on the basis of their
2
To avoid expected cell frequencies of less than 5 (Siegel, 1956, p. 110) in the
chi-square test, we excluded participants who estimated equal numbers of birds
and ﬂowers. Ordinal regression analysis including all cells yielded similar
results.

Volume 19—Number 1

Acknowledgments—We thank Associate Editor Valerie Reyna
and Pierre Chandon, Ralph Hertwig, and Orit Tykocynski for
their valuable comments.
REFERENCES
Brock, T.C. (1968). Implications of commodity theory for value change.
In A.G. Greenwald, T.C. Brock, & T.M. Ostrom (Eds.), Psychological foundations of attitudes (pp. 243–275). New York: Academic Press.
Brunswik, E. (1952). The conceptual framework of psychology (International Encyclopedia of Uniﬁed Science Vols. I and II: Foundations of the Unity of Science. Vol. I, No. 10). Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Estes, W.K. (1976). The cognitive side of probability learning. Psychological Review, 83, 37–64.
Gilovich, T., Grifﬁn, D., & Kahneman, D. (Eds.). (2002). Heuristics and
biases: The psychology of intuitive judgment. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Hammond, K.R. (1990). Functionalism and illusionism: Can integration be usefully achieved? In R.M. Hogarth (Ed.), Insights in
decision making: A tribute to Hillel J. Einhorn (pp. 227–261).
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Hirshleifer, J., Glazer, A., & Hirshleifer, D. (2006). Price theory and
applications: Decisions, markets, and information. New York:
Cambridge University Press.
Kahneman, D., & Frederick, S. (2002). Representativeness revisited:
Attribute substitution in intuitive judgment. In T. Gilovich, D.
Grifﬁn, & D. Kahneman (Eds.), Heuristics and biases: The psychology of intuitive judgment (pp. 49–81). New York: Cambridge
University Press.
McKenzie, C.R.M., & Chase, V.M. (in press). Why rare things are
precious: The importance of rarity in lay inference. In P.M. Todd,
G. Gigerenzer, & The ABC Research Group (Eds.), Ecological
rationality: Intelligence in the world. Oxford, England: Oxford
University Press.
Siegel, S. (1956). Nonparametric statistics for the behavioral sciences.
New York: McGraw-Hill.
Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1974). Judgment under uncertainty:
Heuristics and biases. Science, 185, 1124–1131.

(RECEIVED 1/23/07; REVISION ACCEPTED 5/4/07)

Downloaded from pss.sagepub.com at Virginia Tech on May 14, 2015

19

