Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition
2008, Vol. 34, No. 1, 146 –166

Copyright 2008 by the American Psychological Association
0278-7393/08/$12.00 DOI: 10.1037/0278-7393.34.1.146

Now You See It, Now You Don’t: Repetition Blindness for Nonwords
Alison L. Morris and Mary L. Still

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Iowa State University
Repetition blindness (RB) for nonwords has been found in some studies, but not in others. The authors
propose that the discrepancy in results is fueled by participant strategy; specifically, when rapid serial
visual presentation lists are short and participants are explicitly informed that some trials will contain
repetitions, participants are able to use partial orthographic information to correctly guess repetitions on
repetition trials while avoiding spurious repetition reports on control trials. The authors first replicated
V. Coltheart and R. Langdon’s (2003) finding of RB for words but repetition advantage for nonwords
(Experiment 1). When all participants were encouraged to utilize partial information in a same/different
matching task along with an identification task, a repetition advantage was observed for both words and
nonwords (Experiment 2). When guessing of repetitions was made detectable by including non-identical
but orthographically similar items in the experiments, the repetition advantage disappeared; instead, RB
was found for both words and nonwords (Experiments 3 and 4). Finally, when experiments did not
contain any identical items, participants almost never reported repetitions, and reliable RB was found for
orthographically similar words and nonwords (Experiments 5 and 6).
Keywords: repetition blindness, nonwords, lexical, sublexical, word recognition

appear in close temporal proximity (usually less than 500 ms).
Although RB is strong for identical words, non-identical words
with similar orthography such as cap and cape (Kanwisher &
Potter, 1990), home and hose (Bavelier, Prasada, & Segui, 1994),
brace and crack (Harris & Morris, 2000), and even martini and
tactile (Harris, 2001) also show robust RB. These findings as well
as those of Morris and Harris (1999) and Harris and Morris
(2001b) have suggested that some RB effects might have a sublexical locus.
However, questions have been raised as to whether RB between
orthographically similar items (orthographic RB) reflects the same
phenomenon as RB between identical items (identity RB). Chialant and Caramazza (1997) argued that RB for identical words is
strictly a lexical-level phenomenon, whereas RB for non-identical
words stems from inhibitory processing that occurs during recognition of a single word. On this view, RB between home and hope
occurs because during the process of recognizing home, the representations of orthographically similar words such as hope are
inhibited. When hope is subsequently displayed, its representation
is affected by residual inhibition and therefore the word may not be
recognized. Chialant and Caramazza further suggested that identity
and orthographic RB differ in time course; that is, whereas identity
RB decreased with increasing lag (number of items intervening
between the critical words), orthographic RB showed the reverse
pattern. Unfortunately, their experiments manipulated lag between
items, introducing potential confounds. By using a within-items
design and a greater number of stimuli, Harris and Morris (2001a)
obtained a monotonic decrease in RB with increasing lag for both
identity and orthographic RB. Thus, there is as yet no unequivocal
evidence that the mechanisms underlying identity and orthographic RB differ.
Furthermore, an experiment from Morris and Harris (2004)
provided evidence against the lexical inhibition account of orthographic RB. In that experiment, orthographically similar words

Short-term repetition effects, such as those found by using
masked priming paradigms, currently constitute a major source of
information concerning the types of representations thought to
mediate early stages of word recognition. Accordingly, questions
about the role of lexical versus sublexical representations in repetition effects are often investigated by comparing priming effects
for words and nonwords, because words, by definition, are listed in
the lexicon, and nonwords are not. Although the question of
whether masked repetition priming can be found for nonwords as
well as words appears to be straightforward, the results have been
mixed, largely because much of the evidence to date has been
obtained by using the lexical decision task—a task influenced by
lexicality and familiarity (Balota & Chumbley, 1984; Bodner &
Masson, 1997; Bowers, 1994; Feustel, Shiffrin, & Salasoo, 1983;
Forster, 1998). Similarly, demonstrations of reliable masked repetition priming for nonwords in the naming task (Masson & Isaak,
1999) may simply reflect facilitation of articulatory processes
(Forster, 1998).
Repetition blindness paradigms (RB; Kanwisher, 1987) offer
another opportunity to investigate the role of lexical and sublexical
representations in short-term repetition effects. When a series of
words is displayed in rapid serial visual presentation (RSVP;
Forster, 1970) at a rate of approximately 8 –10 items per second,
and viewers are asked to identify all the words shown, a repeated
word will often go unreported if the two instances of the word

Alison L. Morris and Mary L. Still, Department of Psychology, Iowa
State University.
We wish to thank Miranda Atkinson, Brandon Cornelius, Lisa McFadden, Nichole Stubbe, and Haley Taylor for their assistance in testing
participants.
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Alison L.
Morris, Department of Psychology, W112 Lagomarcino, Iowa State University, Ames, Iowa, 50011-3180. E-mail: almorris@iastate.edu
146

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

REPETITION BLINDNESS FOR NONWORDS

(such as beef and beer) were displayed in RSVP sentences; following the display, one of two cues appeared. When a blue
question mark appeared, participants were to report all the words
in the sentence (serial report condition); however, when “word?”
appeared in a red font, participants were to perform a lexical
decision on a word appearing after the sentence (lexical decision
condition). Large RB effects were found in the serial report task,
but in the lexical decision task, equal amounts of priming were
obtained in the repeated (beef, beer) and nonrepeated (rice, beer)
conditions when compared with control conditions in which beer
was not displayed. In other words, the representation for beer was
activated to the same extent in the repeated and nonrepeated
conditions. This result is not what one would expect if RB for beer
stemmed from lexical inhibition occurring during the process of
recognizing beef.
An additional test of the role of sublexical representations in
short-term repetition involves investigating the presence of RB for
nonwords. If Chialant and Caramazza (1997) are correct, and RB
occurs only for items that are lexically identical, then RB should be
readily demonstrated for words, but not for nonwords (Coltheart &
Langdon, 2003). On the other hand, if RB is not restricted to
lexical representations, it should be possible to demonstrate RB for
nonwords. Harris and Morris (2004) obtained significant RB for
nonwords in four experiments with only two items per trial (two
words, a word–nonword pair, or two nonwords) to minimize
encoding and memory demands for the nonwords. Masson, Caldwell, and Whittlesea (2000), using longer RSVP streams, found
RB for nonword–word pairs such as choif– chief when the nonword was displayed for a sufficient duration (600 ms). However,
two published reports (Campbell, Fugelsang, & Hernberg, 2002;
Coltheart & Langdon, 2003) failed to find RB for nonwords. The
Coltheart and Langdon findings are particularly noteworthy in that
across several experiments they consistently found RB for words
but a repetition advantage for nonwords; that is, the joint report of
the critical items (known as the “both” score, meaning that both
critical items were reported) was actually higher for repeated trials
than for control trials.
Because nonwords are difficult to read in RSVP displays, Coltheart and Langdon’s (2003) finding of a repetition advantage for
nonwords might seem intuitive; it might take two opportunities to
read a nonword in order to encode it accurately. If this were the
case, one would find that the second of the repeated nonwords (C2)
would be correctly reported more often than would a nonrepeated
nonword in the same position in the RSVP stream (a control C2).
For example, when comparing performance on narp jeal narp with
snoy jeal narp, one might expect the second narp to be reported
more accurately in the repeated condition than in the nonrepeated
condition. However, this is not what Coltheart and Langdon found.
They found an increase in the joint report of C1 and C2. This
distinction (between increased report of C2 and increased report of
both C1 and C2) is important.
Coltheart and Langdon (2003) couched their findings within the
token individuation hypothesis of RB originally proposed by Kanwisher (1987). According to this hypothesis, each stimulus item
activates its type representation (an abstract representation), but an
item is consciously identified only if spatiotemporal information (a
token) is bound to its type. In this framework, RB occurs when the
first instance of the item is bound to a token, but its type becomes
temporarily unavailable for additional tokenization. This means

147

that participants will often fail to report the second occurrence of
the repeated item. However, in cases where C1 is not tokenized
(therefore not reported), C2 is free to be tokenized, and there is no
RB; in fact, C2 may be reported more often than a nonrepeated
item. Note that this explanation still assumes that only one of the
identical items is reported; it does not explain how a repetition
advantage in the both score might be obtained. Coltheart and
Langdon explained the finding of a repetition advantage for nonwords as follows:
When the items are nonwords, because these have no preexisting
types, token individuation is likely to be slower, and it might even
require copies of multiple, smaller orthographic segments. Thus, at
high rates of presentation, these items’ probability of being represented in tokens is much lower. However, if the first critical item is
successfully tokenized, the repeated item, as a consequence of priming, will be recognized more quickly, and its orthographic segments
will be able to participate in token formation more rapidly than will
the segments of an unrelated nonword for which the recognition and
orthographic segmentation processes must begin anew. (Coltheart &
Langdon, 2003, p. 183)

This explanation raises a number of questions. If token individuation for nonwords requires copies of smaller orthographic segments, then why aren’t these sublexical tokens subject to the same
limitations as lexical tokens; that is, why isn’t there a time window
during which identical types cannot be retokenized? Similarly,
why does successful tokenization of words result in RB while for
nonwords it results in priming? According to Kanwisher’s theory,
priming for C2 is observed when C1 consistently fails to be
tokenized (Kanwisher, 1987).
A more recently proposed theoretical account of short-term
repetition effects, known as the competition hypothesis (Morris,
Still, & Caldwell-Harris, 2007), may prove more helpful in understanding the differences between performance on words and nonwords in RB experiments. The competition hypothesis is in part
derived from two well-known findings from neurophysiological
studies. The first is that repetition of a stimulus often results in a
decrease in the total amount of activation associated with that
stimulus. This has been demonstrated in fMRI studies using human
participants (e.g., Buckner et al., 1998; Dehaene et al., 2001) and
in electrophysiological recordings from macaque monkeys (e.g.,
Baylis & Rolls, 1987; Miller & Desimone, 1994; Miller, Li, &
Desimone, 1993). Some electrophysiological studies further have
suggested that although the overall neural activity decreases with
repetition, the activity of the cells most critical for representing the
stimulus actually increases (Ringo, 1996). A stimulus representation containing increased activity of critical cells combined with
decreased activity of noncritical cells is known as a “sharpened”
representation (Desimone, 1996; Wiggs & Martin, 1998).
The second neurophysiological finding on which the competition hypothesis is based concerns the neural correlates of perceptual awareness. Several investigators have suggested that transient
activation of a stimulus representation beyond a particular threshold is not sufficient for conscious awareness. At a minimum,
sustained activation of a representation for several hundred milliseconds is required for the item’s occurrence to be stabilized in
working memory; synchronized activity involving a larger network may also be required (for further discussion of these ideas,
see Dehaene & Naccache, 2001; Dehaene et al., 2001; Subrama-

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

148

MORRIS AND STILL

niam, Biederman, & Madigan, 2000; Summerfield, Jack, & Burgess, 2002; Tononi & Edelman, 1998; Ward, 2003).
If stimulus representations require sustained activation to
reach consciousness, it is therefore not surprising that some
items fail to be reported from even short RSVP displays, or that
viewers often have a sense of fleeting awareness accompanied
by rapid forgetting (Wolfe, 1999). In addition, the rapid display
of successive items creates competition between the item representations for access to conscious awareness (Enns & Di
Lollo, 2000). If the sustained activation of an item’s representation is interfered with by competing representations, the item
may go unnoticed, or the viewer may be aware that a target item
occurred but may be unable to identify the item (Park &
Kanwisher, 1994).
Specific predictions of the competition hypothesis are best
illustrated by a computational implementation, which is more
completely described in Morris et al. (2007). In the competition
model, type representations for single letters are overlapping
distributed representations consisting of both signal and noise
nodes. Five premises guide the predictions: (a) Type representations are activated sequentially and their activity decays over
time; (b) forward masking consists of residual activation from
the previously encoded item which is incorporated into the type
activation of the current item; (c) backward masking (in conjunction with forward masking) induces competition for access

to awareness between adjacent items; (d) when a letter is
repeated, its type representation is sharpened—that is, the representation has increased signal relative to noise and decreased
total activation; (e) each item representation competes with
adjacent items for access to awareness, and the type representation with the larger summed activity (type representation ⫹
attention) wins the competition. Because the sharpened representations of repeated items carry less total activation, they lose
the competition for access to awareness more often than do
nonrepeated items. Thus, RB is an emergent property of competitive interactions between items displayed in RSVP.
Figure 1 illustrates the difference between the type representations for repeated and nonrepeated items according to the
competition model. Under rapid or brief display conditions,
some of the activation from C1 fails to decay prior to display of
C2, and this persisting activation is added to the type representation for C2. In the case of nonrepeated items, the result is a
noisier type representation which sometimes results in misidentification. When C1 and C2 are identical, however, forward
masking has the effect of sharpening the representation. A
sharpened representation is produced when the activation of the
signal node reaches an upper limit, while the activation of the
noise nodes decreases. Sharpened representations are most often associated with repetition priming; however, they can also

Figure 1. This figure illustrates the effect of first critical word (C1) encoding effectiveness and repetition on
second critical word (C2) type activation. Type activation is depicted by the black bars; the bars labeled with an
“S” represent the signal for each item. The three bars on the far left represent type activation for C1. After C1
has been activated it slowly decays leaving persistent activation (represented by the gray bars) to be added to the
next item’s type representation. The sets of bars labeled “C2 activation” represent the type activation for repeated
and nonrepeated C2s. The black part of each bar represents what the type activation of C2 would be if nothing
was displayed prior to it. The gray part on top of each bar represents persistent activation from C1 that is added
to the type representation of C2 (forward masking). Notice that when C1 is well encoded, the signal of a repeated
C2 will reach ceiling (depicted by the dotted line) and the “extra” activation will not contribute to total type
activation. This accounts for the reduced activation associated with repeated items compared with nonrepeated
items. No reduction in activation occurs for a repeated C2 when C1 is poorly encoded.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

REPETITION BLINDNESS FOR NONWORDS

produce RB when multiple items are competing for access to
awareness.1
Although the competition model was designed to simulate RB
for single letters, similar principles could be applied to RB for
words by assuming that the total activation associated with a word
is in part determined by the activations associated with the representations of its constituent letters. Because the degree of orthographic overlap is greater for identical words than for similar
words, the competition hypothesis predicts that RB for orthographically similar words should generally be smaller than RB for
identical words; this is in fact the typical finding (Harris & Morris,
2000).2 The competition hypothesis also provides a principled
explanation for the probabilistic nature of RB; because of noise in
the system, repeated items will sometimes exceed adjacent items in
total activation and consequently will gain access to awareness.
What are the implications of the competition hypothesis concerning RB for nonwords? It is generally accepted that nonwords
are encoded more poorly than are words in RSVP displays; thus,
nonword representations have a smaller signal-to-noise ratio than
do more familiar stimuli (e.g., words). This means that the signal
node of a nonword C1 generally has a lower activation level than
that of a word C1. Consequently, when a nonword is repeated, its
signal node will increase in activation but may not reach ceiling (as
it would if C1 had been better encoded; see Figure 1). The lack of
a ceiling effect means that there is no decrease in total activation
associated with C2’s representation. In other words, under conditions of poor encoding, there will be a benefit associated with
repetition (increased signal-to-noise ratio), but no cost; there will
be priming of the type representation, but no RB. In sum, the
competition hypothesis predicts that RB should be more difficult
to demonstrate for nonwords than for words. However, it should be
possible to obtain RB for nonwords if they are sufficiently well
encoded. This requirement explains why Harris and Morris (2004)
and Masson et al. (2000) were able to demonstrate small RB
effects when short lists or long display durations were used. Most
important for the present discussion, a repetition advantage in the
joint report of C1 and C2 for nonwords coincident with RB for
words is not generally predicted by the competition hypothesis.
However, it is possible that the repetition advantage for nonwords found by Coltheart and Langdon (2003) could be explained
as the result of a participant guessing strategy that is separate from
the RB phenomenon itself. For example, if participants tended to
guess repeated items when recall of the stimuli was poor (as it was
for nonwords in their experiments) this may have inflated the both
score in the repeated condition for nonwords, masking any indication of RB and producing an apparent repetition advantage.
Coltheart and Langdon did consider the possibility that their obtained repetition advantage for nonwords reflected a guessing bias
in favor of repeated items, but they rejected it because spurious
reports of repeated items on control and two-item trials were
infrequent.
Unfortunately, attempting to control for guessing of repetitions
by considering only spurious repetition reports on control or twoitem trials may be inadequate, because it assumes that participants
cannot discriminate between repeated and control trials, or between two- and three-item trials. In Coltheart and Langdon’s
(2003) procedure, participants were warned to expect repeated
items; RSVP lists had only two or three items that were to be
reported; and repetitions occurred frequently and always involved

149

the first and last words or nonwords. This means that participants
were likely to be able to discriminate potential repeated trials from
control trials simply on the basis of partial identification of the
items.
For example, if the nonrepeated control stimulus %%%% ####
gerb foat sulp @@@@ was displayed, and participants were able
to identify “gerb, foat, and something beginning with s,” they
would not have enough information to obtain credit on the both
score but would have enough information to know it was not a
repeated trial; consequently, they would not be likely to guess a
repetition. Similarly, participants would not be likely to report
three items following a two-item list if they simply observed that
symbols always intervened between the two words or nonwords in
such lists. However, if the repeated stimulus %%%% #### sulp
foat sulp @@@@ was displayed, and the participant identified
“sulp, foat, and something else,” there would be the possibility of
a repetition, and so they may have guessed a second sulp with
some probability P. We propose that fleeting awareness of a third
item coupled with a lack of evidence that the item differed from
the others could be sufficient to support accurate guessing of
repetitions.
Guessing of repetitions with probability P on repeated trials but
not on control or two-item trials would inflate the both score for
repeated trials (for both words and nonwords) while having no
effect on the both score for control trials. If several participants
guessed repetitions, the both scores across participants on repeated
trials would tend to equalize across words and nonwords (e.g.,
40% accuracy) while the both scores for control trials would
remain high for words (e.g., 60% accuracy) and low for nonwords
(e.g., 20% accuracy) because nonwords are less easily identified
than words. The result would be that the repeated score would be
higher than the control score for nonwords (repetition advantage)
but would still be lower than the control score for words (RB). This
is exactly the pattern obtained by Coltheart and Langdon (2003;
Experiments 1, 2, and 6).
In this article, we examined the possibility that “informed guessing” strategies could account for the finding of RB for words but
a repetition advantage for nonwords; we also investigated RB for
non-identical nonwords. To anticipate, in Experiment 1 we replicated Coltheart and Langdon’s (2003) finding of RB for words but
a repetition advantage for nonwords; in Experiment 2, we encouraged all participants to employ an informed guessing strategy by
including a same/different discrimination task, producing a repetition advantage for both words and nonwords; in Experiments 3
and 4, we discouraged the use of such a strategy by including
orthographically similar trials, eliminating the repetition advantage
for nonwords and producing RB for both words and nonwords; and
1

In addition, attention can increase the total activation associated with a
representation, making it more competitive against adjacent items. If
attention is applied at the beginning of an RSVP stream and is allowed to
decay, items near the beginning of the stream will have an advantage over
later items; if the level of attention is low, or the RSVP stream consists of
many items, the performance function will tend to be U-shaped.
2
Phonological and semantic overlap may also play a role in RB; however, these effects are generally small compared with the effects of orthographic overlap.

MORRIS AND STILL

150

in Experiments 5 and 6, we conducted additional investigations of
RB for orthographically similar nonwords.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Experiment 1
To examine the possibility that an informed guessing strategy
was responsible for producing the outcome of RB for words but
repetition advantage for nonwords, we first needed to replicate this
finding. In the majority of Coltheart and Langdon’s (2003) experiments, word and nonword trials were presented in separate blocks.
Unfortunately, this complicates the interpretation of results from
these experiments, because presenting words and nonwords in
separate blocks can lead to the use of different strategies for
reporting words and nonwords. Accordingly, Experiment 1 was
designed as a replication of Coltheart and Langdon’s Experiment
6, in which word and nonword trials were intermixed.

Method
Participants. Twenty-four Iowa State University undergraduates participated for course credit. All were native speakers of
English; 3 were bilingual.
Materials. Following Coltheart and Langdon (2003), we selected 72 monosyllabic words and 72 pronounceable nonwords;
nonwords were selected from the ARC Nonword Database (Rastle,
Harrington, & Coltheart, 2002). All items were 4 letters in length
and were monosyllabic. Orthographic neighborhood size (orthographic N) was included as a factor in the design; half the words
and nonwords had an orthographic N of 12 or greater, and the other
half had an orthographic N of 5 or less. High-N and low-N words
were similar in print frequency (15 per million; Francis & Kučera,
1982). On the basis of the literature investigating N effects in
naming tasks (see Andrews, 1997, for a review), we did not expect
large differences in report of high-N and low-N words, but considering the difficulty of reporting nonwords displayed in RSVP,
we expected that high-N nonwords would be better encoded than
would low-N nonwords. Thus, we predicted that it might be easier
to demonstrate RB for high-N nonwords than for low-N nonwords.
The high-N and low-N items were each divided into three sets
of 12 items for counterbalancing purposes, and the sets were
matched on N and print frequency (mean N sizes per set were 14.8,
14.7, and 14.3 for the high-N words; 13.9, 13.9, and 13.9 for the
high-N nonwords; 3.8, 3.8, and 3.8 for the low-N words; and 3.1,
3.2, and 3.1 for the low-N nonwords). Sequences of 3 words or 3
nonwords were created with the first and last words or nonwords
designated C1 and C2. These were then made into 6-item RSVP
streams by displaying rows of symbols (e.g., %%%%, ####) as the
first, second, and sixth items in each RSVP stream. The words or
nonwords occupied the third, fourth, and fifth positions in each
RSVP stream. Stimulus sets 1 and 2 were used to create the
repeated condition, where C1 and C2 were identical. The control
condition was created from the repeated condition by substituting
a word from Stimulus set 3 for C1. Words or nonwords intervening
between C1 and C2 were selected from a separate pool of items
having N sizes between 5 and 12. Two versions of the stimulus list
were created such that each participant viewed 12 three-word lists
in the high-N repeated condition, 12 in the high-N control condition, 12 in the low-N repeated condition, and 12 in the low-N
control condition. The same was true for the 3-nonword lists. Each

participant also viewed 40 RSVP streams with only 2 words or
nonwords (a row of symbols was substituted for the intervening
word or nonword). Each participant saw each critical word or
nonword only once. In both versions of the stimulus list, word and
nonword lists were randomly intermixed. All stimulus items used
in Experiments 1 and 2 are shown in the Appendix (additional
stimulus items used in Experiments 3– 6 may be obtained from
Alison L. Morris).
Apparatus and procedure. The stimuli for all experiments
reported in this article were presented on a Macintosh G4 with
display controlled by the PsyScope experimental control software
(Cohen, MacWhinney, Flatt, & Provost, 1993). The procedure was
similar to that of Coltheart and Langdon (2003) except for the
mode of response. In the Coltheart and Langdon studies, participants wrote down all the words or nonwords they had seen,
whereas in the present experiment, participants named all words or
nonwords displayed and the experimenter coded the response into
the data file by using the computer keyboard (keys were labeled
C1, C2, N, and B, thus providing minimal feedback to participants). In both cases, participants were warned that some of the
RSVP lists would contain repeated items, and they were to report
these twice.
Each trial began with a “⫹” displayed in the middle of the
computer screen for 560 ms, followed by a blank interval of 560
ms. The RSVP stream was then displayed with each item appearing for 126 ms. Following the RSVP stream, a “?” was displayed
to indicate that the participant should report the items. The next
trial began immediately after the experimenter keyed in the participant’s response. All stimuli were displayed in a white font (36
pt. Chicago) on a black background. The experimental trials were
preceded by 10 practice trials.

Results and Discussion
Critical pair recall. Following Coltheart and Langdon (2003),
we measured RB by comparing the percentage of trials in which
both C1 and C2 were reported for the repeated condition compared
with the control condition. The results are shown in Figure 2.
Repeated-measures analyses of variance (ANOVAs) with the factors condition (repeated or control), lexicality (word or nonword),
and neighborhood size (high-N or low-N) revealed that joint report
of words was higher than that of nonwords (47.0% vs. 18.9%),
F1(1, 23) ⫽ 66.22, F2(1, 92) ⫽ 201.99, both ps ⬍ .001; and control
pairs were correctly reported at a higher rate than repeated pairs
(38.4% vs. 27.4%), F1(1, 23) ⫽ 4.63, p ⬍ .05, F2(1, 92) ⫽ 33.18,
p ⬍ .001. There was no main effect of neighborhood size (both
Fs ⬍ 1). The main effect of condition was qualified by a significant crossover interaction between condition and lexicality, F1(1,
23) ⫽ 110.85, F2(1, 92) ⫽ 103.43, both ps ⬍ .001. There was also
a significant interaction between lexicality and neighborhood size,
F1(1, 23) ⫽ 7.58, F2(1, 92) ⫽ 5.68, both ps ⬍ .05. The Condition ⫻ Lexicality interaction reflects an RB effect for words but a
repetition advantage for nonwords; the Lexicality ⫻ Neighborhood Size interaction reflects superior recall of low-N words
compared with high-N words, with the reverse pattern for nonwords. The Lexicality ⫻ Neighborhood Size interaction was qualified by a significant Condition ⫻ Lexicality ⫻ Neighborhood
Size interaction, F1(1, 23) ⫽ 6.44, F2(1, 92) ⫽ 4.28, both ps ⬍ .05.
As can be seen in Figure 2, the triple interaction reflects the fact

that the Lexicality ⫻ Neighborhood Size interaction is seen only in
the control trials and not in the repeated trials; the same pattern
was found by Coltheart and Langdon (2003). The finding of higher
accuracy for low-N words compared with high-N words is often
observed in perceptual identification tasks; although this finding is
sometimes attributed to inhibitory effects of higher frequency
neighbors during word recognition, it has also been attributed to a
guessing process. If participants guess when the identities of words
are poorly encoded, high-N words will be associated with incorrect
guesses more often than will low-N words (Snodgrass & Mintzer,
1993; see also Andrews, 1997).
Most important, we replicated Coltheart and Langdon’s finding
of a significant crossover interaction between condition and lexicality in critical item recall. Further analysis of this interaction
revealed a significant RB effect for words, F1(1, 23) ⫽ 7.83, p ⬍
.05, F2(1, 46) ⫽ 102.54, p ⬍ .001. Nonwords showed a significant
repetition advantage in the item analysis, F(1, 46) ⫽ 12.75, p ⬍
.005; although not in the subject analysis, F(1, 23) ⫽ 2.57, p ⫽ .12.
Intervening item recall. To further investigate RB in this experiment, report of the item intervening between C1 and C2 was
examined. Recall of the intervening item, on both word and
nonword trials, was increased when it appeared in the context of
repeated items. The percentage of correct report of the second
word or nonword in each three-item list is shown in Table 1.3
Correct report of intervening words was higher than report of
intervening nonwords, F1(1, 23) ⫽ 236.19, F2(1, 94) ⫽ 318.49,
both ps ⬍ .001. There was also a significant main effect of
condition, such that the intervening item was reported at a higher
rate when it appeared in the context of repeated items, F1(1, 23) ⫽
62.33, F2(1, 94) ⫽ 62.85, both ps ⬍ .001. The main effect of
condition was qualified by a Condition ⫻ Lexicality interaction,
F1(1, 23) ⫽ 15.22, p ⬍ .005, F2(1, 94) ⫽ 8.47, p ⬍ .01. The
interaction reflects a larger increase in intervening item recall for
nonwords versus words. Our finding of increased recall of the
intervening item on repeated trials mirrors that of Coltheart and
Langdon (2003); however, our explanation for the intervening item
effect is different from theirs.
80
Mean % Critical Pair Recall

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

REPETITION BLINDNESS FOR NONWORDS

70
Repeated
60

Control

50
40
30
20
10
0
Word
Low N

Word
High N

Nonword
Low N

Nonword
High N

Type of Item
Figure 2. Mean percentages of joint report of critical words and nonwords as a function of neighborhood size and condition in Experiment 1.
Error bars represent standard errors of the mean. N ⫽ orthographic neighborhood size.

151

Table 1
Mean Percentages of Intervening Item Recall for Word and
Nonword Lists in Repeated and Control Conditions in
Experiment 1
Condition
Type of item
Word
Nonword

Repeated

Control

76
33

67
14

Recall that according to the competition hypothesis, adjacent
items compete for access to awareness on the basis of the summed
neural activity for each item (Morris et al., 2007). Because a
repeated C2 is generally associated with less summed neural
activity than is a nonrepeated C2, a repeated C2 will compete less
effectively against the preceding item (the item intervening between C1 and C2). The result will be an increase in report of the
intervening item in the repeated condition compared with that in
the control condition. If both RB for C2 and the intervening item
effect are indeed driven by the same process (reduced competitiveness of repeated items), the presence of an intervening item
effect for nonwords suggests that RB might have been observed if
there had not been any guessing of repetitions on repeated trials.
Coltheart and Langdon (2003) attempted to reconcile the cooccurrence of a repetition advantage and the intervening item
effect on nonword trials by arguing that the intervening item effect
stems from a decrease in processing resources needed at the type
identification stage. Thus, by their account, the increase in report
of the intervening item in the repeated condition occurs because
type identification of C2 is easier when it is a repeated item.
Some might claim a memory locus for this intervening item
effect in that when an item from the RSVP stream is missed, there
are fewer items that one has to hold in memory—thereby giving an
advantage to any other item that appeared in the list. While this is
a reasonable hypothesis, we (along with Luo and Caramazza,
1996) argue that such a memory benefit should occur for any of the
items from the list, not just those immediately adjacent to C2.
Although the results of this experiment cannot rule out a memory
effect, other investigations, using five-item displays, have observed a significant increase in report of the item immediately
preceding a repeated C2 (Luo & Caramazza, 1996; Morris et al.,
2007). Thus the intervening item effect is more localized than
would be predicted by a memory account.
In sum, Experiment 1 successfully replicated Coltheart and
Langdon’s (2003) main findings even though a different response
format was used (verbal responses were used as opposed to handwritten responses). In contrast to Coltheart and Langdon, however,
we suggest that the repetition advantage for nonwords reflects the
use of an informed guessing strategy based on partial orthographic
information and/or fleeting awareness of the stimuli. Informed
guessing would tend to selectively inflate the both scores on
repeated trials; this could in turn mask any RB for nonwords and
reduce RB for words. Our finding that the repetition advantage for
3

Intervening item data are presented collapsed across the factor of
neighborhood size.

MORRIS AND STILL

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

152

nonwords was significant in the item analysis but not significant in
the subject analysis is consistent with the idea that some participants may have employed such a strategy to a greater degree than
others did.4 Most important, such informed guessing would not be
detectable by examining spurious reports of repetitions on control
trials or two-item trials. We propose that participants would be
unlikely to guess repetitions on control trials as they may have
access to partial information pertaining to the repetition status of
the trial and the number of items appearing in the trial. Spurious
repetition reports were in fact rare in Experiment 1 (reports of
repetitions occurred on 2.5% of control trials and 4.3% of two-item
trials).
Although the results of Experiment 1 are consistent with our
proposal that the repetition advantage for nonwords is produced by
some participants using an informed guessing strategy, the results
are also consistent with Coltheart and Langdon’s (2003) contention that identity at the lexical level is required to produce RB.
Additional support for our claim that participants have sufficient
access to partial stimulus information to reliably discriminate
repeated from control trials (and from two-item trials) would be
found if we could demonstrate that more widespread use of partial
information can produce a repetition advantage for both words and
nonwords. This possibility was investigated in Experiment 2.

Experiment 2
In Experiment 2, a second task was introduced that encouraged
participants to use partial information about the stimuli in making
their recognition judgments. As we have mentioned, participants
could reliably discriminate repeated from three-item control trials
if they simply gleaned enough partial orthographic information
from each of the items to know that they differed. However, to
effectively use a strategy of guessing repetitions, participants must
also discriminate repeated trials from two-item trials. There are at
least two ways that participants could make this discrimination in
the absence of explicit identification of both of the repeated items.
The first is to note that on two-item trials, a symbol string always
intervened between the target items, whereas on three-item trials,
the three words always appeared in succession. The second method
involves a process of low-level visual matching between the target
items; it may be the case that participants can detect a match or
mismatch between C1 and C2 even when awareness of C2 is
insufficient to support explicit identification.
Performance on cross-field matching has been demonstrated to
be significantly higher than forced-choice identification performance in patients with visual neglect (Verfaellie, Milberg,
McGlinchey-Berroth, & Grande, 1995). According to Verfaellie et
al. (1995), one explanation for the dissociation is that only a
fleeting awareness of visual information is required for the matching task but a more stable record is required for identification. It is
possible that a similar dissociation occurs when participants view
RSVP streams; participants may sometimes have access to sufficient information to judge whether C1 and C2 match in the
absence of explicit identification of C2. Of course, if C1 is identified and C2 is judged a match, then the identity of C2 can be
inferred.
In Experiment 2, in addition to asking participants to identify all
the RSVP items, participants were asked to judge whether the first
and last words or nonwords on each trial were the same or

different. The same/different task allows a more direct assessment
of the amount of partial information available on repeated and
control trials; specifically, it allows us to determine the extent to
which participants can discriminate potential repeated trials from
control trials. Furthermore, if participants often have access to
partial information about the stimuli, drawing their attention to this
information via the same/different judgment should increase the
accuracy of their reports of repeated items in the identification
task. Making increased use of partial stimulus information should
not increase participants’ identification accuracy for control trials
because explicit knowledge of the identities of both items is
needed. However, partial orthographic information on control trials should prevent false reports of repeated items on these trials.
Similarly, false reports of repeated items on two-item trials (which
are always nonrepeated trials) should be low if participants can
ascertain that only two words or nonwords were presented, and
that they differed orthographically.
If the available partial stimulus information is sufficient for
most participants to make accurate same/different judgments about
the stimuli, and they apply this knowledge to the identification
task, their reports of repeated items (on repeated trials) should be
increased for both words and nonwords in comparison with those
of Experiment 1. Identification accuracy for control trials, however, should not differ significantly from that observed in Experiment 1.

Method
Participants. Twenty-four Iowa State University undergraduates participated for course credit. All were native speakers of
English; 3 were bilingual.
Materials. Two blocks of trials were created from the stimuli
used in Experiment 1. Two different tasks (same/different judgment and identification) were performed on each RSVP trial, with
the order of these tasks varied by block. During the first block, half
the participants first made the same/different judgment and then
identified the words or nonwords; the other participants first identified the words or nonwords and then made the same/different
judgment. During the second block, the respective task orders were
reversed. Block was a between-items variable, that is, half the
items were assigned to the first block and the other half to the
second block. Each block contained equal numbers of trials defined by the factors condition (repeated or control), lexicality
(word or nonword), and neighborhood size (high-N or low-N).
Procedure. The procedure was similar to that in Experiment 1,
but with the addition of the same/different task. When the same/
different task occurred first, the cue “same or different?” appeared
following the RSVP stream. After the experimenter keyed in the
same or different response, the cue “identify all items” appeared.
When the identification task appeared first, the cues appeared in
the opposite order. The experimental trials were again preceded by
10 practice trials.
4

As suggested by an anonymous reviewer, the fact that some participants are influenced more than others by partial information and knowledge of prior probabilities is also consistent with Bayesian accounts of
perceptual processing.

REPETITION BLINDNESS FOR NONWORDS

Same/Different Task

153

Identification Task
Repeated

100

Nonrepeated

90

Mean % Correct

80
70
60
50
40
30
20

0
Word
Low N

Word
High N

Nonword Nonword
Low N
High N

Word
Low N

Word
High N

Nonword Nonword
Low N
High N

Block 1
Same/Different Task

Identification Task

100
90
80

Mean % Correct

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

10

70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
Word
Low N

Word
High N

Nonword Nonword
Low N
High N

Word
Low N

Word
High N

Nonword Nonword
Low N
High N

Block 2
Figure 3. Mean percentage of correct scores on the same/different task and the identification task for words
and nonwords as a function of block, neighborhood size, and condition in Experiment 2. Error bars represent
standard errors of the mean. N ⫽ orthographic neighborhood size.

Results and Discussion
Initial analyses on results from the same/different and identification tasks revealed that task order (a between-subjects variable)
did not show a main effect, nor did it interact with any other factor;
therefore, subsequent analyses were collapsed across task order.5
Results from the same/different and identification tasks in the two
blocks are shown in Figure 3.
Same/different task. Participants were highly accurate on the
same/different task (89.4% correct overall on the repeated and
control trials, with only 4 of the 24 participants scoring less than
80%). A repeated-measures ANOVA on the percentage of correct
scores with the factors condition, lexicality, neighborhood size,
and block revealed a significant main effect of lexicality, with
slightly higher scores for words (90.8%) than for nonwords
(88.0%), F1(1, 23) ⫽ 4.73, F2(1, 88) ⫽ 5.40, both ps ⬍ .05; and
a significant main effect of block, with higher scores in the second

block (92.8%) than in the first block (86.0%), F1(1, 23) ⫽ 10.63,
p ⬍ .005, F2(1, 88) ⫽ 37.92, p ⬍ .001. There was also a significant
main effect of condition, with higher scores on control trials
(97.2%) than on repeated trials (81.6%), F1(1, 23) ⫽ 8.57, p ⬍ .01,

5
It may initially seem surprising that task order did not have more of an
influence on the results. For example, one might expect identification
scores for repeated items to be more influenced by the same/different
judgment when the latter was performed first. This would be the case if the
judgments required for the two tasks were indeed made sequentially.
However, the lack of task order effects suggests that even though the
responses on the two tasks were made sequentially, the judgments driving
the responses may have been interdependent rather than sequential. For
some participants, regardless of task order, the same/different judgment
may have influenced the identification judgment, while for others, the
reverse may have been the case.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

154

MORRIS AND STILL

F2(1, 88) ⫽ 130.39, p ⬍ .001. The Condition ⫻ Lexicality
interaction was significant, F1(1, 23) ⫽ 6.52, F2(1, 88) ⫽ 6.90,
both ps ⬍ .05; as was the Condition ⫻ Block interaction, F1(1,
23) ⫽ 5.22, p ⬍ .05, F2(1, 88) ⫽ 16.09, p ⬍ .001. The Condition ⫻ Lexicality interaction indicated that the main effect of
lexicality was driven by the scores in the repeated condition
(84.7% correct for words, 78.5% correct for nonwords), whereas
the scores in the control condition were equivalent (96.9% for
words, 97.6% for nonwords). The Condition ⫻ Block interaction
indicated that the difference in accuracy between the repeated and
control scores was reduced in the second block. No other interactions were significant in both the subjects and items analyses.
The high accuracy level on the same/different task for both
words and nonwords suggests that participants were largely able to
discriminate potential repeated trials from control trials. In particular, participants were very unlikely to report “same” on control
trials, possibly because they had access to sufficient partial orthographic information to rule out a repetition on these trials. However, in order for one to reliably use partial orthographic information as part of an informed guessing strategy, one must also be able
to discriminate two-item trials from three-item trials. The mean
probability of report of “same” on two-item trials was 12.7%,
which is higher than the 4.3% obtained in Experiment 1. However,
the rate of spurious reports of repetitions on two-item trials varied
greatly among the participants. Four of the participants should be
considered outliers, as they reported repetitions on 32.5%–77.5%
of two-item trials. The mean percentage of spurious repetition
reports on two-item trials for the remaining 20 participants was
only 4.5%, comparable with the rate found in Experiment 1. Thus,
the majority of participants were able to effectively discriminate
repeated from control trials and two-item trials.
Identification task: Critical pair recall. As in Experiment 1,
we measured RB by comparing the percentage of trials in which
both C1 and C2 were reported (both scores) for the repeated
condition compared with the control condition. Repeated-measures
ANOVAs with the factors condition, lexicality, neighborhood size,
and block revealed that joint report of words was higher than that
of nonwords (73.9% vs. 42.1%), F1(1, 23) ⫽ 263.87, F2(1, 88) ⫽
243.99, both ps ⬍ .001; and repeated pairs were correctly reported
at a higher rate than were control pairs (74.2% vs. 41.8%), F1(1,
23) ⫽ 72.23, F2(1, 88) ⫽ 316.15, both ps ⬍ .001. Although the
finding of greater joint report of words than of nonwords is
consistent with the results of Experiment 1, the finding of greater
report of repeated items than of control items (a repetition advantage for both words and nonwords) is not. The repetition advantage
in Experiment 2 was greater for nonwords than for words, as
revealed by a significant interaction between condition and lexicality, F1(1, 23) ⫽ 54.97, F2(1, 88) ⫽ 94.05, both ps ⬍ .001.
Follow-up comparisons revealed that the repetition advantage was
significant for words, F1(1, 23) ⫽ 15.06, p ⬍ .005, F2(1, 44) ⫽
35.63, p ⬍ .001; and for nonwords, F1(1, 23) ⫽ 99.30, F2(1, 44) ⫽
348.54, both ps ⬍ .001. We also found a significant Block ⫻
Lexicality ⫻ Neighborhood Size interaction, F1(1, 23) ⫽ 6.76,
F2(1, 88) ⫽ 4.60, both ps ⬍ .05. In the first block, high-N words
were correctly reported at a higher rate than were low-N words,
whereas low-N nonwords were correctly reported at a higher rate
than were high-N nonwords; in the second block, the opposite
pattern was found. A significant Condition ⫻ Lexicality ⫻ Neighborhood Size interaction, F1(1, 23) ⫽ 14.42, F2(1, 88) ⫽ 10.52,

both ps ⬍ .005, further indicates that for control trials, low-N
words were correctly reported at a higher rate than were high-N
words, whereas high-N nonwords were correctly reported at a
higher rate than were low-N words; the opposite pattern was found
for repeated trials.
Identification task: Intervening item recall. As in Experiment
1, recall of the intervening item on both word and nonword trials
was increased when it appeared in the context of repeated items.
The percentage of correct report of the second word or nonword in
the three-item lists for both blocks of trials and both task orders is
shown in Table 2. Repeated-measures ANOVAs with the factors
task order, condition, lexicality, and block revealed that correct
report of intervening words was higher than report of intervening
nonwords, F1(1, 22) ⫽ 405.84, F2(1, 92) ⫽ 356.36, both ps ⬍
.001. The main effect of condition was significant such that the
intervening item was reported at a higher rate when it appeared in
the context of repeated items, F1(1, 22) ⫽ 74.48, F2(1, 92) ⫽
110.70, both ps ⬍ .001. There was also a significant Task Order ⫻
Block interaction, F1(1, 22) ⫽ 7.15, p ⬍ .05, F2(1, 92) ⫽ 15.60,
p ⬍ .001, which indicates that the intervening item was reported at
a higher rate when the identification task occurred first. This likely
reflects the effect of rapid forgetting of the intervening item when
the identification task was performed following the same/different
task. Finally, there was a significant Condition ⫻ Lexicality ⫻
Block interaction, F1(1, 22) ⫽ 8.95, p ⬍ .01, F2(1, 92) ⫽ 9.57, p ⬍
.005. This interaction reflects the fact that the intervening item
effect for words was greater in the first block than in the second
block, whereas the intervening item effect for nonwords showed a
tendency to increase in the second block. No other main effects or
interactions were significant in both the subjects and items analyses.
The results of Experiment 2 were as predicted; when all participants were required to make a same/different judgment in addition
to identifying the words or nonwords, both words and nonwords
showed a repetition advantage in the identification task. The implication is that participants are able to use partial orthographic
information and/or fleeting awareness of the stimuli to reliably

Table 2
Mean Percentages of Intervening Item Recall for Word and
Nonword Lists in Repeated and Control Conditions in
Experiment 2
Block 1
Condition

Repeated

Block 2
Control

Repeated

Control

88
53

80
19

77
35

69
16

Task Order 1
Word
Nonword

87
35

67
11
Task Order 2

Word
Nonword

92
34

65
17

Note. For Task Order 1, in Block 1 the same/different task was performed
first, and in Block 2 the identification task was performed first. For Task
Order 2, in Block 1 the identification task was performed first, and in Block
2 the identification task was performed first.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

REPETITION BLINDNESS FOR NONWORDS

discriminate repeated from control trials. When they use this
information in their identification reports, any RB that might have
been evident, whether for words or nonwords, can be masked by
guessing of repetitions. Most important, such guessing is not
detectable as spurious reports of repetitions on control trials (these
occurred on less than 3% of control trials in Experiment 2).
Therefore, the usual type of guessing correction based on false
reports of repeated items on control trials may be inadequate.
Could spurious reports of repetitions on two-item trials still be
used to correct for guessing? One might surmise that the 4 participants who produced large numbers of spurious repetition reports
on two-item trials were the source of the repetition advantage
found for words in Experiment 2. Accordingly, we conducted
additional analyses on the critical item recall scores, excluding the
4 participants in question. These analyses produced the same
pattern of results as those computed over all participants; that is, a
repetition advantage for both words and nonwords was exhibited
by participants who were able to reliably discriminate repeated
from control trials and two-item trials.
The results of Experiment 2 support our proposed explanation
for the finding of a repetition advantage for nonwords in Experiment 1. If several participants used an informed guessing strategy
in Experiment 1, this would have raised the level of repetition
reports on repeated trials enough to produce a repetition advantage
for nonwords (which exhibited low accuracy on control trials) but
not for words (with much higher accuracy on control trials). When
all participants were encouraged to use an informed guessing
strategy in Experiment 2, the level of repetition reports on repeated
trials was raised still further, producing a repetition advantage for
both words and nonwords.
Some might argue that the addition of the same/different task in
Experiment 2 changed the way participants processed the stimuli,
making it difficult to draw inferences about the findings of Experiment 1 from those of Experiment 2. We suggest that such inferences would be warranted if performance on Experiment 2 closely
resembled that on Experiment 1, with the exception of the increase
in repetition reports on repeated trials. Figure 4 demonstrates that
the addition of the same/different task in Experiment 2 served to
increase correct reports of repeated items but left reports of control
items unchanged from the level obtained in Experiment 1. This
was confirmed by two cross-experiment ANOVAs. For repeatedcondition trials, a significant main effect of experiment showed
that the joint report of critical items was higher in Experiment 2
than in Experiment 1, F(1, 46) ⫽ 38.63, p ⬍ .001, whereas for
control trials there was a null effect of Experiment (F ⬍ 1).
Additional evidence supporting our contention that the stimuli
in Experiments 1 and 2 were processed in a similar manner can be
found by comparing identification performance for the item intervening between C1 and C2. Participants may have attended to the
critical items at the expense of the intervening item in Experiment
2 because the same/different task required comparison of only the
critical items. However, inspection of the data in Tables 1 and 2
reveals that performance on the intervening item was similar in the
two experiments; if anything, performance was slightly better in
Experiment 2.
Finally, one might wonder whether the same/different task provided participants with feedback regarding the correctness of their
responses on this task, which could then influence performance on
the identification task. There are two reasons that this is unlikely.

155

Figure 4. Cross-experiment comparison: Mean percentages of joint report of critical words and nonwords as a function of neighborhood size and
condition in Experiments 1 and 2. Error bars represent standard errors of
the mean. N ⫽ orthographic neighborhood size.

The first is that the participants’ same/different responses were
keyed in as “same” or “different” rather than “correct” or “incorrect.” The second is that there was no effect of task order on
identification performance; that is, performing the same/different
task first did not result in an improvement in performance on the
identification task.
In sum, Experiment 2 demonstrated that participants could make
use of partial and/or fleeting information from the display to
accurately discriminate repeated from control trials. If sufficient
numbers of participants in Experiment 1 used an informed guessing strategy on a sufficient proportion of trials, the amount of
measurable RB would be reduced for both words and nonwords,
but the effect on nonwords would be much greater because the
identification score for control nonwords tends to be much lower
than that for words. Thus, the net effect would be a reduction in
RB for words, and a complete reversal of the RB effect for
nonwords, just as was found in Experiment 1.
Unfortunately, it is not possible to determine which participants
in Experiment 1 may have been using such a strategy, and to what
extent. The results of Experiment 2 make it clear that applying a

MORRIS AND STILL

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

156

guessing correction based on false reports of repeated items on
control trials is not adequate, because participants can glean sufficient information from control trials to avoid making false reports of repetitions. A similar limitation applies to the use of false
reports on two-item trials to correct for guessing, as most participants can reliably discriminate two-item from repetition trials.
What is needed is a type of trial in which RB occurs, but in
which guessing a repetition is an incorrect response. Recall that a
number of experiments have demonstrated RB for words which are
similar but not identical (e.g., Bavelier et al., 1994; Harris &
Morris, 2000; Kanwisher & Potter, 1990; Morris & Harris, 1999).
Trials in which C1 and C2 are orthographic neighbors (e.g., cart
and cast, slan and slad) may provide a way of gauging the degree
to which participants are guessing repetitions. If participants experience RB on some of these trials, they may guess a repetition;
and unlike on trials in which C1 and C2 are identical, such a guess
would be counted as incorrect. In addition to providing a means of
documenting guessing of repetitions, including the neighbor trials
may have the effect of discouraging such guessing because the
ability to determine which trials are potential repeated trials is
reduced. If the amount of guessing of repetitions is reduced sufficiently, this may in turn allow RB for identical nonwords to be
revealed.

Experiment 3
In Experiment 3, trials in which the critical words were orthographic neighbors (e.g., cart and cast, slan and slad) were included
in an attempt to decrease guessing of repetitions on repeated trials.
If guessing of repetitions does persist, it may be apparent on these
trials; a report of cart and cart would be an incorrect response if
cart and cast had actually been displayed. Participant’s scores can
then be corrected for guessing by subtracting the proportion of
spurious repetitions on neighbor trials from the proportion of
repetition responses on repeated trials.

Method
Participants. Twenty-four Iowa State University undergraduates participated for course credit. All were native speakers of
English.
Materials. Each item in Experiment 3 appeared in three conditions: repeated, control, and neighbor. To create the neighbor
condition, words and nonwords from Experiments 1 and 2 were
paired with an orthographic neighbor C1 (e.g., cast was paired
with cart). The control condition was created from the repeated
condition by substituting an orthographically nonsimilar word or
nonword for C1.6 Words or nonwords intervening between C1 and
C2 were selected from a separate pool of items having N sizes
between 4 and 12; these words were orthographically dissimilar to
C1 and C2. Four versions of the stimulus list were created such
that each participant viewed 6 three-word lists in the high-N
repeated condition, 6 in the high-N neighbor condition, 12 in the
high-N control condition, 6 in the low-N repeated condition, 6 in
the low-N neighbor condition, and 12 in the low-N control condition. The same was true for the 3-nonword lists. Thus, the
proportion of repeated trials was smaller than in Experiments 1 and
2. Each item appeared in repeated, neighbor, and control conditions, counterbalanced across participants. In addition to these

trials, participants also viewed 40 RSVP streams with only 2 words
or nonwords (a row of symbols was substituted for the intervening
word or nonword). Participants viewed each critical word or nonword only once. In all versions of the stimulus list, word and
nonword lists were randomly intermixed.
Procedure. The procedure was the same as in Experiment 1;
again, participants were warned that some of the RSVP lists would
contain repeated items, and they were to report these twice. Participants were also warned that “some of the words or nonwords
will look similar to each other” and that they should read them
carefully.

Results and Discussion
The major purpose of Experiment 3 was to discourage guessing
of repetitions by adding neighbor trials to the design and by
cautioning participants that some of the words and nonwords
would look similar to each other. A second purpose was to provide
a means of estimating the probability of guessing of repetitions
should they still occur. The top half of Table 3 shows the percentage of participants reporting 0, 1, 2, or 3⫹ false repetitions on
control, two-item, and neighbor trials for words and nonwords in
Experiment 3. Each participant viewed only six word and six
nonword neighbor trials, so even one spurious report of a repetition
amounted to a significant percentage (16.7%) of those trials. As
can be derived from the table, 42% of participants reported a
repetition on a neighbor trial at least once on word trials, and 37%
reported a repetition at least once on nonword trials. Spurious
reports of repetitions on control or two-item trials were rare. Thus,
even though Experiment 3 was designed to discourage the use of
an informed guessing strategy, many participants appear to have
used such a strategy nonetheless.
Critical pair recall. Figure 5 shows the uncorrected mean
percentage of joint recall of critical items for all conditions in
Experiment 3. Separate analyses were conducted on repeated and
neighbor trials (each in comparison with control trials) to examine
RB for repeated and orthographically similar words and nonwords.
Turning first to the repeated items, a repeated-measures ANOVA
with the factors condition (repeated vs. control), lexicality, and
neighborhood size revealed that joint report of words was higher
than that of nonwords (66.1% vs. 31.2%), F1(1, 23) ⫽ 170.47,
F2(1, 92) ⫽ 169.13, both ps ⬍ .001; and control pairs were
correctly reported at a higher rate than were repeated pairs (55.2%
vs. 42.2%), F1(1, 23) ⫽ 8.89, p ⬍ .01, F2(1, 92) ⫽ 25.07, p ⬍
.001. There was no main effect of neighborhood size (both Fs ⬍
1). The Condition ⫻ Lexicality interaction was significant, F1(1,
23) ⫽ 20.78, F2(1, 92) ⫽ 26.45, both ps ⬍ .001; but all other
interactions were nonsignificant (all Fs ⬍ 1). Further analysis of
the critical Condition ⫻ Lexicality interaction revealed a significant RB effect for repeated words, F1(1, 23) ⫽ 17.52 p ⬍ .001,
F2(1, 46) ⫽ 50.23, both ps ⬍ .001; but a null effect for repeated
nonwords (both Fs ⬍ 1). It appears that including neighbor trials
in the design may have discouraged guessing of repetitions to the
extent that the repetition advantage for nonwords was eliminated,
but not enough so that RB for repeated nonwords could be shown
with the uncorrected scores.
6

Adding the neighbor condition necessitated altering several of the
stimuli from Experiments 1 and 2.

REPETITION BLINDNESS FOR NONWORDS

Table 3
Percentage of Participants Producing 0, 1, 2, or 3⫹ False
Repetition Reports on Control, Two-Item, and Neighbor Trials
for Words and Nonwords in Experiments 3 and 4
Number of false repetition reports
Words

Experiment 3
Control
Two-item
Neighbor
Experiment 4
Control
Two-item
Neighbor

0

1

2

3⫹

0

1

2

3⫹

100
96
58

0
0
21

0
4
13

0
0
8

96
96
63

4
4
25

0
0
4

0
0
8

100
96
54

0
0
29

0
4
4

0
0
13

100
100
59

0
0
25

0
0
8

0
0
8

Note. In Experiment 3, all stimulus items were displayed for 126 ms. In
Experiment 4, when the first critical item was a nonword, it was displayed
for a longer duration (252 ms) than when it was a word (126 ms).

Although guessing of repetitions has the potential to reduce the
appearance of RB for the repeated nonwords, it should not mask
RB for the orthographically similar nonwords because such
guesses would not be counted as correct. Turning to the neighbor
trials, a repeated-measures ANOVA with the factors condition
(neighbor vs. control), lexicality, and neighborhood size revealed
that joint report of words was higher than that of nonwords (65.5%
vs. 25.0%), F1(1, 23) ⫽ 177.29, F2(1, 92) ⫽ 214.52, both ps ⬍
.001; and control pairs were correctly reported at a higher rate than
neighbor pairs (55.2% vs. 35.2%), F1(1, 23) ⫽ 41.63, F2(1, 92) ⫽
58.91, both ps ⬍ .001. The main effect of neighborhood size was
not significant, F1(1, 23) ⫽ 2.71, p ⬎ .10, F2(1, 92) ⫽ 2.06, p ⬎
.15. The Condition ⫻ Lexicality interaction was significant, F1(1,
23) ⫽ 7.83, p ⬍ .05, F2(1, 92) ⫽ 8.53, p ⬍ .005; whereas the
Condition ⫻ Neighborhood Size interaction was significant in the

subjects analysis, F1(1, 23) ⫽ 5.91, p ⬍ .05; but only approached
significance in the items analysis, F2(1, 92) ⫽ 2.88, p ⫽ .09. The
Lexicality ⫻ Neighborhood Size interaction was significant in the
subjects analysis, F1(1, 23) ⫽ 4.49, p ⬍ .05; but not in the items
analysis, F2(1, 92) ⫽ 1.40, p ⬎ .20. The Condition ⫻ Lexicality ⫻
Neighborhood Size interaction was not significant, F1(1, 23) ⫽
1.07, p ⬎ .30, F2(1, 92) ⫽ 1.33, p ⬎ .25. Further analysis of the
Condition ⫻ Lexicality interaction revealed a significant RB effect
for neighbor words, F1(1, 23) ⫽ 43.22, F2(1, 46) ⫽ 60.38, both
ps ⬍ .001; as well as a significant RB effect for neighbor nonwords, F1(1, 23) ⫽ 12.16, F2(1, 46) ⫽ 10.56, both ps ⬍ .005.
In sum, the uncorrected critical item recall scores from Experiment 3 revealed RB for repeated words, a null effect for repeated
nonwords, and RB for neighbor words and nonwords. The finding
of RB for neighbor nonwords but not for repeated nonwords is
consistent with the notion that the scores for repeated nonwords
(and, by extension, repeated words) were inflated by guessing.
Furthermore, the pattern of reports of repetitions on neighbor trials
shown in Table 3 suggests that the use of an informed guessing
strategy may have been widespread in Experiment 3, despite
attempts to discourage it.
Corrected scoring. Would a significant RB effect for repeated
nonwords emerge if the scores were corrected for guessing? To
investigate this, false reports of repetitions in the neighbor condition were subtracted from the uncorrected score for the repeated
condition for each participant (and each item in the item analysis).
The results are shown in Figure 6. Planned comparisons revealed
a significant RB effect for words, F1(1, 23) ⫽ 29.51, F2(1, 46) ⫽
69.18, both ps ⬍ .001; and an effect of RB for nonwords that
approached significance, F1(1, 23) ⫽ 3.04, F2 (1, 46) ⫽ 3.10, both
ps ⫽ .09. These data show that when a more appropriate guessing
correction is applied, a small amount of repetition blindness for
repeated nonwords becomes apparent.
Intervening item recall. The percentage of correct report of the
second word or nonword in each three-item list is shown in the top
half of Table 4. Correct report of intervening words was higher

90

90

70

Repeated

60

Control
Neighbor

50
40
30
20

Mean % Critical Pair Recall

80

80
Mean % Critical Pair Recall

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Condition

Nonwords

157

70
Repeated

60

Control

50
40
30
20
10

10

0

0
Word
Low N

Word
High N

Nonword
Low N

Nonword
High N

Type of Item
Figure 5. Uncorrected mean percentages of joint report of critical words
and nonwords as a function of neighborhood size and condition in Experiment 3. Error bars represent standard errors of the mean. N ⫽ orthographic
neighborhood size.

Word
Low N

Word
High N

Nonword
Low N

Nonword
High N

Type of Item
Figure 6. Corrected mean percentages of joint report of critical words
and nonwords for the repeated and control conditions as a function of
neighborhood size in Experiment 3. Error bars represent standard errors of
the mean. N ⫽ orthographic neighborhood size.

MORRIS AND STILL

158

Table 4
Mean Percentages of Intervening Item Recall for Word and
Nonword Lists in Repeated, Control, and Neighbor Conditions
in Experiments 3 and 4
Condition
Type of item

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Experiment 3
Word
Nonword
Experiment 4
Word
Nonword

Repeated

Control

Neighbor

89
37

72
21

77
26

86
44

68
22

72
30

Note. In Experiment 3, all stimulus items were displayed for 126 ms. In
Experiment 4, when the first critical item was a nonword, it was displayed
for a longer duration (252 ms) than when it was a word (126 ms).

than correct report of intervening nonwords, F1(1, 23) ⫽ 201.12,
F2(1, 94) ⫽ 462.78, both ps ⬍ .001. There was also a significant
main effect of condition, F1(2, 46) ⫽ 23.46, F2(2, 188) ⫽ 22.12,
both ps ⬍ .001. The Condition ⫻ Lexicality interaction was not
significant (both Fs ⬍ 1). Planned comparisons indicated that the
intervening item was reported at a higher rate in the context of
repeated items than in the context of control items, F1(1, 23) ⫽
40.54, F2(1, 94) ⫽ 63.32, both ps ⬍ .001; and at a higher rate in
the context of neighbor items than in the context of control items,
F1(1, 23) ⫽ 5.73, F2(1, 94) ⫽ 4.09, both ps ⬍ .05. Thus, intervening item effects were found for both the repeated and neighbor
conditions relative to the control condition. This finding is relevant
to the debate concerning the mechanism underlying RB for orthographically similar words. If orthographic RB stems from residual
lexical inhibition occurring during the process of recognizing C1,
there is no reason to expect an intervening item effect for the
neighbor trials. If, on the other hand, orthographic RB stems from
the same mechanism as identity RB, one should find an intervening item effect in both cases (although the intervening item effect
associated with orthographic RB should be smaller because the
representations of C1 and C2 are not identical—thus only a portion
of the representation of C2 is sharpened). The results of the
intervening item analysis provide support for our contention that
the same mechanism underlies both identity and orthographic RB.
Taken together, the results of Experiments 2 and 3 suggest that
the finding of a repetition advantage depends on the widespread
use of an informed guessing strategy. Experiment 2 demonstrated
that when participants are encouraged to use such a strategy (by
drawing their attention to the frequent repetitions in the experiment) a repetition advantage can be obtained for both words and
nonwords. Experiment 3 demonstrated that when an informed
guessing strategy is made less efficacious, even the repetition
advantage for nonwords disappears.
It is important to note that the results of Experiment 3 do not
reflect only a decrease in guesses of repeated items. If that were the
case, the magnitude of the RB effect for repeated words should
have been higher in Experiment 3 than that in Experiment 1.
Furthermore, there should not have been a difference between the
two experiments in the accuracy of report of control items. In
contrast, a comparison of the results from Experiment 3 (shown in
Figure 5) with those from Experiment 1 (shown in Figure 2)

suggests that overall accuracy on both repeated and control trials
was considerably higher in Experiment 3. Thus, although the main
goal of Experiment 3 was to decrease guessing of repetitions, the
result may be more properly characterized as a decrease in reliance
on guessing accompanied by an overall increase in attention to the
stimuli.
Experiment 3 further demonstrated that RB can be obtained for
neighbor nonwords, whereas RB for repeated nonwords was weak
(only approaching significance in our sample of 24 participants).
The finding of more RB for neighbor nonwords than for repeated
nonwords is puzzling, as more RB is generally found for identical
items than for orthographically similar items (e.g., Harris & Morris, 2000). However, it is possible that the amount of guessing of
repetitions on repeated trials was underestimated. Recall that the
estimate of guessing was based on spurious repetition reports on
the neighbor trials, so if a participant is highly accurate on those
trials, the amount of guessing that can be measured is constrained.
A few participants were indeed highly accurate on their reports of
neighbor nonwords, so the estimate of guessing of repetitions
based on errors in the neighbor condition could be too low. If RB
for repeated nonwords is generally small, it may still be masked by
any residual guessing of repetitions not accounted for in the
corrected scores.
However, if the size of the RB effect could be increased, it
should be possible to demonstrate more reliable RB for repeated
nonwords even when all guessing is not accounted for in the
corrected scores. As discussed previously, the competition hypothesis predicts that little to no RB will be found when items are
poorly encoded (Morris et al., 2007). An estimate of the relative
encoding effectiveness of words versus nonwords can be derived
from the percentage of correct reports of these items in the control
condition. In Experiment 3, report of C1 words was highly accurate (92.5% correct), whereas report of C1 nonwords was less
accurate (67.2% correct). If the effectiveness of nonword encoding
were somehow increased, the amount of RB for repeated nonwords
should also be increased.

Experiment 4
In Experiment 4, type encoding of the C1 nonword was increased by doubling its display duration relative to that used in the
previous experiments. Although this manipulation also increased
the SOA between the critical nonwords, the increase in RB from
improved type encoding was expected to outweigh any diminution
of the RB effect stemming from the increased SOA. In addition,
whereas the competition hypothesis predicts an increase in RB
with increased encoding effectiveness of the C1 nonword, Coltheart and Langdon (2003) would appear to predict the opposite.
According to their explanation of the repetition advantage for
nonwords, successful report of the first nonword results in priming
of the repeated nonword. On their view, therefore, an increase in
the ability to correctly report C1 might result in an increase in the
repetition advantage for nonwords.

Method
Participants. Twenty-four Iowa State University undergraduates participated for course credit. All were native speakers of
English; 1 was bilingual.

REPETITION BLINDNESS FOR NONWORDS

Materials. The stimuli used in Experiment 4 were identical to
those used in Experiment 3.
Procedure. The procedure was the same as in Experiment 3,
except that all C1 nonwords were displayed for 252 ms, twice as
long as the C1 words (126 ms). Each of the other items in the
RSVP stream was displayed for 126 ms as in the previous experiments.

The use of a longer display duration for the C1 nonwords in
Experiment 4 appears to have been effective in increasing participants’ accuracy of report of those items. Correct report of C1
nonwords (86.6%) was nearly as high as correct report of C1
words (89.9%). Although Experiment 4 was designed to increase
the encoding effectiveness of nonwords, guessing of repetitions
was not expected to decrease relative to Experiment 3. The bottom
half of Table 3 shows the percentage of participants reporting 0, 1,
2, or 3⫹ false repetitions on control, two-item, and neighbor trials
for words and nonwords in Experiment 4. As can be derived from
the table, 46% of participants reported a repetition on a neighbor
trial at least once on word trials, and 41% reported a repetition at
least once on nonword trials, a guessing rate that was comparable
with that seen in Experiment 3. Spurious reports of repetitions on
control or two-item trials were again quite rare.
Critical pair recall. Figure 7 shows the uncorrected mean
percentage of recall of both critical items for all conditions in
Experiment 4. Separate analyses were conducted on repeated and
neighbor trials (each in comparison with control trials) to examine
RB for repeated and orthographically similar words and nonwords.
Turning first to the repeated items, a repeated-measures ANOVA
with the factors condition (repeated vs. control), lexicality, and
neighborhood size revealed that joint report of words was higher
than that of nonwords (54.7% vs. 28.5%), F1(1, 23) ⫽ 104.57,
F2(1, 92) ⫽ 70.93, both ps ⬍ .001; and control pairs were correctly
reported at a higher rate than were repeated pairs (49.6% vs.

90
80
Mean % Critical Pair Recall

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Results and Discussion

70

Repeated
Control

60

Neighbor

50
40
30
20
10
0
Word
Low N

Word
High N

Nonword
Low N

Nonword
High N

Type of Item
Figure 7. Uncorrected mean percentages of joint report of critical words
and nonwords as a function of neighborhood size and condition in Experiment 4. Error bars represent standard errors of the mean. N ⫽ orthographic
neighborhood size.

159

33.5%), F1(1, 23) ⫽ 8.54, p ⬍ .01, F2(1, 92) ⫽ 24.09, p ⬍ .001.
There was no main effect of neighborhood size (both Fs ⬍ 1). The
main effect of condition was qualified by a significant Condition ⫻ Lexicality interaction, F1(1, 23) ⫽ 26.74, F2(1, 92) ⫽
15.68, both ps ⬍ .001. No other interactions were significant in
both the subjects and items analyses. Further analysis of the critical
Condition ⫻ Lexicality interaction revealed a significant RB effect
for words, F1(1, 23) ⫽ 16.22, p ⬍ .005, F2(1, 46) ⫽ 33.21, p ⬍
.001; but a null effect for nonwords (both Fs ⬍ 1).
Turning to the neighbor trials, a repeated-measures ANOVA
with the factors condition (neighbor vs. control), lexicality, and
neighborhood size revealed that joint report of words was
higher than that of nonwords (53.0% vs. 24.8%), F1(1, 23) ⫽
113.04, F2(1, 92) ⫽ 99.66, both ps ⬍ .001; and control pairs
were correctly reported at a higher rate than were neighbor pairs
(49.6% vs. 28.1%), F1(1, 23) ⫽ 43.17, F2(1, 92) ⫽ 42.42, both
ps ⬍ .001. The main effect of neighborhood size was significant
in the subjects analysis, F1(1, 23) ⫽ 6.30, p ⬍ .05; but only
approached significance in the items analysis, F2(1, 92) ⫽ 2.90,
p ⫽ .09. The Condition ⫻ Lexicality interaction was significant, F1(1, 23) ⫽ 20.43, p ⬍ .001, F2(1, 92) ⫽ 10.43, p ⬍ .005;
as was the Lexicality ⫻ Neighborhood Size interaction, F1(1,
23) ⫽ 8.10, p ⬍ .01, F2(1, 92) ⫽ 5.07, p ⬍ .05. No other
interactions were significant in both the subjects and items
analyses. Further analysis of the Condition ⫻ Lexicality interaction revealed a significant RB effect for words, F1(1, 23) ⫽
49.00, F2(1, 46) ⫽ 36.64, both ps ⬍ .001; as well as a significant RB effect for nonwords, F1(1, 23) ⫽ 11.91, p ⬍ .005,
F2(1, 46) ⫽ 7.65, p ⬍ .01. In sum, the uncorrected critical pair
recall scores from Experiment 4 revealed RB for repeated
words, a null effect for repeated nonwords, and RB for neighbor
words and nonwords. This is the same pattern found for the
uncorrected scores in Experiment 3.
Corrected scoring. As in Experiment 3, we corrected the
critical pair recall scores for guessing by subtracting false reports
of repetitions in the neighbor condition from the uncorrected score
for the repeated condition for each participant (and each item in the
item analysis). The results are shown in Figure 8. Planned comparisons revealed a significant RB effect for words, F1(1, 23) ⫽
31.54, F2(1, 46) ⫽ 44.68, both ps ⬍ .001; and a significant RB
effect for nonwords, F1(1, 23) ⫽ 4.80, F2(1, 46) ⫽ 4.32, both ps ⬍
.05. Thus, the corrected scores for Experiment 4 revealed that RB
can be demonstrated for repeated nonwords as well as for repeated
words.
Intervening item recall. The percentage of correct report of the
second word or nonword in each three-item list is shown in the
bottom half of Table 4. Correct report of intervening words was
higher than report of intervening nonwords, F1(1, 23) ⫽ 257.76,
F2(1, 94) ⫽ 175.40, both ps ⬍ .001. There was also a significant
main effect of condition, F1(2, 46) ⫽ 33.41, F2(2, 188) ⫽ 22.65,
both ps ⬍ .001. The Condition ⫻ Lexicality interaction was not
significant in either analysis. Planned comparisons indicated that
the intervening item was reported at a higher rate in the context of
repeated items than in the context of control items, F1(1, 23) ⫽
76.83, F2(1, 95) ⫽ 45.30, both ps ⬍ .001; and at a higher rate in
the context of neighbor items than in the context of control items,
F1(1, 23) ⫽ 7.54, F2(1, 95) ⫽ 5.36, both ps ⬍ .05.

MORRIS AND STILL

160

100

90
80
70
Repeated
Control

60
50
40
30
20
10
0
Word
Low N

Word
High N

Nonword
Low N

Nonword
High N

Type of Item
Figure 8. Corrected mean percentages of joint report of critical words
and nonwords for the repeated and control conditions as a function of
neighborhood size in Experiment 4. Error bars represent standard errors of
the mean. N ⫽ orthographic neighborhood size.

Repeated

90
Mean % Critical Pair Recall

We have suggested that the spurious reports of repetitions on
neighbor trials indicate the use of an informed guessing strategy.
However, some might argue that a false repetition report merely
represents misreading of an item as an orthographically similar
item, as has been observed to occur in RSVP (e.g., Kanwisher &
Potter, 1990). Perhaps the participants reporting high numbers of
repeated items in the neighbor condition were simply poorer at
reading rapidly presented words and nonwords. To further investigate the source of spurious repetition reports, we divided the
participants in Experiments 3 and 4 (combined) into low repetitions (0 repetitions on neighbor trials, n ⫽ 23) and high repetitions
(⬎ 0 repetitions on neighbor trials, n ⫽ 25) groups; the results are
shown in Figure 9. As can be seen in the figure, the high repetitions participants were not less accurate than the low repetitions
participants at reporting words and nonwords in the control or
neighbor conditions. In fact, the scores for the high repetitions
participants were numerically higher than the scores for the low
repetitions participants, although these differences did not reach
statistical significance for the control condition, F(1, 46) ⫽ 1.98,
p ⬎ .15; or for the neighbor condition, F(1, 46) ⫽ 2.27, p ⬎ .10.
However, the two groups did differ significantly in accuracy of
report in the repeated condition, with greater accuracy for the high
repetitions group, F(1, 46) ⫽ 24.58, p ⬍ .001. It is also noteworthy
that for the high repetitions group, RB for repeated words (12%)
was much smaller than that for neighbor words (29%); as noted
previously, RB for repeated words is generally larger than RB for
orthographically similar words. Although it is post hoc, this analysis reinforces our contention that spurious reports of repetitions
on neighbor trials were largely guesses rather than misreadings of
otherwise correctly perceived stimulus items.
In sum, increasing the encoding effectiveness of the C1 nonword in Experiment 4 by increasing the exposure duration enabled
statistically significant RB to be demonstrated for the repeated
nonwords when the scores were corrected for guessing. It is also

Mean % Critical Pair Recall

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Guessing or Misreading?

Control

80

Neighbor

70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
Word

Nonword

Low Repetitions

Word

Nonword

High Repetitions

Figure 9. Uncorrected mean percentages of joint report of critical words
and nonwords for participants with high versus low numbers of spurious
repetition reports in Experiments 3 and 4 combined. Error bars represent
standard errors of the mean.

important to note that increasing the percentage of correct report of
the C1 nonwords did not restore the repetition advantage for
nonwords obtained in Experiment 1. Thus, the results of Experiment 4 provide additional evidence in support of our argument that
the repetition advantage for nonwords is an artifact of informed
guessing strategies rather than a result of successful tokenization
of the C1 nonword.
Taken together, the experiments thus far demonstrate the difficulties in estimating the magnitude of the RB effect for repeated
nonwords when guessing of repetitions is prevalent. Guessing of
repetitions has also posed problems in correctly estimating the
magnitude of RB for repeated words when a similar words-andsymbols paradigm has been used (Harris & Morris, 2001a). One
strategy to reduce guessing of repetitions is to refrain from informing participants that many trials will contain repeated items; however, this could result in an overestimation of the RB effect by
introducing a response bias. A second strategy is to use longer
RSVP lists and vary the serial positions of the repeated items.
Although this may be an effective strategy for investigating RB for
words, the use of longer lists would likely drive report of nonwords
to floor levels, making it impossible to obtain measurable RB.
Using non-identical items rather than repeated items in investigations of RB appears to significantly decrease the use of guessing
strategies (although it may not eliminate them altogether).7 Harris
and Morris (2004) were able to obtain reliable RB for nonidentical nonwords by using a two-word display with intervening
symbol masks. However, it is important to establish that RB for
non-identical nonwords is replicable across different display formats. Although significant RB for neighbor nonwords in threeitem displays was demonstrated in Experiments 3 and 4, those
experiments also included repeated items. Accordingly, Experi7
If rhyming items compose a significant proportion of the stimuli,
participants may adopt the strategy of guessing rhyming items (Harris &
Morris, 2000).

REPETITION BLINDNESS FOR NONWORDS

ment 5 investigated whether RB for neighbor nonwords occurs
when no repeated items are present in the experiment.

Experiment 5 examined RB for words and nonwords that are
orthographic neighbors (e.g., swim and slim; kerg and kerp); no
repeated items were present in the experiment. The use of orthographic neighbors rather than repeated items should make it more
difficult for participants to use an informed guessing strategy to
overcome RB for words or nonwords. As a significant amount of
guessing was not anticipated, we did not increase the exposure
duration for the C1 nonword; all words and nonwords were displayed for the same duration (126 ms).

Method
Participants. Twenty-four Iowa State University undergraduates participated for course credit. All were native speakers of
English; 1 was bilingual.
Materials. Words and nonwords used as C2 in Experiment 1
were each paired with an orthographic neighbor C1 (e.g., boss was
paired with bass) to create the neighbor condition. The control
condition was created from the neighbor condition by substituting
an orthographically nonsimilar word or nonword for C1. As in the
previous experiments, N and print frequency of C1 were similar
across neighbor and control conditions.
Procedure. The procedure was the same as in Experiment 1,
except that participants were not told to expect repeated words or
nonwords. Instead, they were warned that “some of the words or
nonwords will look similar to each other” and were told to read
them carefully.

Results and Discussion
Critical pair recall. Figure 10 shows the mean percentage of
correct recall of both critical items for the various conditions in

80
70
Mean % Critical Pair Recall

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Experiment 5

Neighbor

60

Control
50
40
30
20
10
0
Word
Low N

Word
High N

Nonword
Low N

Nonword
High N

161

Experiment 5. Repeated-measures ANOVAs with the factors condition, lexicality, and neighborhood size demonstrated that joint
report of words was higher than that for nonwords (51.2% vs.
13.5%), F1(1, 23) ⫽ 123.65, F2(1, 92) ⫽ 113.61, both ps ⬍ .001;
and control pairs were correctly reported at a higher rate than were
repeated pairs (44.6% vs. 20.1%), F1(1, 23) ⫽ 69.38, F2(1, 92) ⫽
35.46, both ps ⬍ .001. The main effect of neighborhood size was
not significant, F1(1, 23) ⫽ 1.10, p ⬎ .30, F2 ⬍ 1. The Condition ⫻ Lexicality interaction was significant, F1(1, 23) ⫽ 57.58,
F2(1, 92) ⫽ 149.95, both ps ⬍ .001; this interaction reflects a
greater amount of RB for words than for nonwords. None of the
other interactions were significant in both the subjects and items
analyses. Further analysis of the Condition ⫻ Lexicality interaction revealed that the RB effect was significant for words, F1(1,
23) ⫽ 110.13, F2(1, 46) ⫽ 179.22, both ps ⬍ .001; and nonwords,
F1(1, 23) ⫽ 12.63, p ⬍ .005, F2(1, 46) ⫽ 18.39, p ⬍ .001.
In contrast to the previous four experiments, participants did not
tend to produce spurious repetition reports. Only 1 participant
reported a repetition on a neighbor trial, and no repetitions were
reported on two-item or control trials. These results support our
contention that the repetition reports noted on neighbor trials in
Experiments 3 and 4 indicated the use of an informed guessing
strategy in those experiments.
Intervening item recall. The percentage of correct report of the
second word or nonword in each three-item list is shown in the top
half of Table 5. Correct report of intervening words was higher
than report of intervening nonwords, F1(1, 23) ⫽ 402.35, F2(1,
94) ⫽ 353.23, both ps ⬍ .001. There was also a significant main
effect of condition, such that the intervening item was reported at
a higher rate when it appeared in the context of neighbor items,
F1(1, 23) ⫽ 10.19, F2(1, 94) ⫽ 11.51, both ps ⬍ .005. The
Condition ⫻ Lexicality interaction was not significant (both Fs ⬍
1). The significant intervening item effects found in Experiments
3, 4, and 5 for neighbor items compared with control items are
predicted by the competition model; when C2 is orthographically
similar to C1, C2’s representation will be associated with less
activation than will a control C2, and therefore will compete less
effectively against adjacent items. The result is a net gain in
competitiveness for the item immediately preceding the orthographically similar C2. Note also that the intervening item effect in
Experiment 5 cannot be attributed to lexical priming from C1 to
C2; in the case of neighbor words, C1 and C2 are not the same
lexical item, and in the case of nonwords, neither one is a lexical
item.
In sum, Experiment 5 revealed that reliable RB can be demonstrated for non-identical nonwords in three-item displays when no
repeated items are present in the experiment. RB was obtained for
nonwords even though performance on control trials was relatively
low (19% correct joint report), and participants were explicitly told
to expect similar-looking items. In Experiment 6, we provide a
replication of this effect, using a different response format and
additional analyses to further examine nonword recall from RSVP
displays.

Type of Item

Experiment 6
Figure 10. Mean percentages of joint report of critical words and nonwords as a function of neighborhood size and condition in Experiment 5.
Error bars represent standard errors of the mean. N ⫽ orthographic neighborhood size.

In each of the experiments described thus far, participants
viewed the RSVP stream and immediately reported what they saw
to an experimenter, who then keyed in the response. Pilot studies

MORRIS AND STILL

Table 5
Mean Percentages of Intervening Item Recall for Word and
Nonword Lists in Neighbor and Control Conditions in
Experiments 5 and 6
Condition
Type of item

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Experiment 5
Word
Nonword
Experiment 6
Word
Nonword

Neighbor

Control

79
21

72
15

72
14

64
9

indicated that having participants type in their responses rather
than report them to the experimenter resulted in an overall decrease in performance, perhaps because this response mode tended
to be slower and some of the stimuli were forgotten before they
could be typed. However, a typed record of the participants’
responses can be useful in obtaining a better estimate of partial
orthographic information obtained from the stimuli. Our claim is
that the guessing strategy assumed to be operating in Experiments
1– 4 was effective (and largely undetectable on control trials in
Experiments 1–2) because most participants could glean sufficient
partial information from a trial to determine whether it was a
potential repetition trial or not. The both score, while providing a
good estimate of the RB effect, may severely underestimate the
amount of partial information available. Accordingly, in Experiment 6 we attempted to replicate the RB effect for neighbor
nonwords obtained in Experiment 5, but participants were instructed to type their responses in addition to reporting them to the
experimenter.

Method
Participants. Twenty-four Iowa State University undergraduates participated for course credit. All were native speakers of
English.
Materials. Materials were the same as those used in Experiments 3 and 4, except that the repeated condition was omitted. Half
of the three-item trials were neighbor trials, and the other half were
control trials.
Procedure. The procedure was the same as in Experiment 5,
except that participants first reported their responses to the experimenter and then typed the words or nonwords, with a space
between each item, using the computer keyboard. They were
allowed to correct typing mistakes with the delete key.

Results and Discussion
All of the following analyses were based on the participants’
typed responses. Participants’ spoken responses yielded a similar
pattern of results.
Critical pair recall. Figure 11 shows the mean percentage of
correct recall of both critical items for the various conditions in
Experiment 6. Repeated-measures ANOVAs with the factors condition, lexicality, and neighborhood size demonstrated that joint
report of words was higher than that for nonwords (51.2% vs.

12.7%), F1(1, 23) ⫽ 92.34, F2(1, 92) ⫽ 280.24, both ps ⬍ .001;
and control pairs were correctly reported at a higher rate than
repeated pairs (39.4% vs. 24.5%), F1(1, 23) ⫽ 55.02, F2(1, 92) ⫽
42.98, both ps ⬍ .001. The main effect of neighborhood size was
not significant, F1(1, 23) ⫽ 1.37, p ⬎ .25 (F2 ⬍ 1). The Condition ⫻ Lexicality interaction was significant, F1(1, 23) ⫽ 12.76,
F2(1, 92) ⫽ 11.00, both ps ⬍ .005; this interaction reflects a
greater amount of RB for words than for nonwords. None of the
other interactions were significant in both the subjects and items
analyses. Further analysis of the Condition ⫻ Lexicality interaction revealed that the RB effect was significant for words, F1(1,
23) ⫽ 40.54, F2(1, 46) ⫽ 33.41, both ps ⬍ .001; and nonwords,
F1(1, 23) ⫽ 13.71, F2(1, 46) ⫽ 9.69, both ps ⬍ .005. As in
Experiment 5, participants did not tend to report repetitions. Only
1 participant reported a repetition on a neighbor trial, and no
repetitions were reported on two-item or control trials.
Intervening item recall. The percentage of correct report of the
second word or nonword in each three-item list is shown in the
bottom half of Table 5. Correct report of intervening words was
higher than report of intervening nonwords, F1(1, 23) ⫽ 200.13,
F2(1, 94) ⫽ 471.53, both ps ⬍ .001. There was also a significant
main effect of condition, such that the intervening item was reported at a higher rate when it appeared in the context of neighbor
items, F1(1, 23) ⫽ 9.73, p ⬍ .01, F2(1, 94) ⫽ 11.18, p ⬍ .005. The
Condition ⫻ Lexicality interaction was not significant (both Fs ⬍
1). In sum, Experiment 6 successfully replicated the results of
Experiment 5, in that reliable RB was found for neighbor nonwords as well as words, and both types of stimuli showed an
intervening item effect. We next report the results of additional
analyses designed to further investigate RB for words and nonwords.
Additional analyses. To provide a better estimate of the availability of partial orthographic information from three-item RSVP
displays, we calculated the percentage of trials on which at least
two letters of a word or nonword were reported correctly. For
example, suppose the stimulus item bink juff rast was reported as

80
70
Mean % Critical Pair Recall

162

Neighbor
Control

60
50
40
30
20
10
0
Word
Low N

Word
High N

Nonword
Low N

Nonword
High N

Type of Item
Figure 11. Mean percentages of joint report of critical words and nonwords as a function of neighborhood size and condition in Experiment 6.
Error bars represent standard errors of the mean. N ⫽ orthographic neighborhood size.

REPETITION BLINDNESS FOR NONWORDS

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

bink just raff. With the standard scoring, neither the joint report of
critical items nor the report of the intervening item would be
scored as correct. With the alternative scoring, however, all three
items (C1, C2, and the intervening item) would be scored as
correct. Table 6 shows the alternative scoring results from the
control condition of Experiment 6. As can be seen in the table,
participants were able to report a significant percentage of the
letters from the word and nonword displays in the control condition. The implication is that a strategy of guessing repetitions will
be effective for many participants because their access to partial
orthographic information will be sufficient to avoid spurious reports of repetitions on control trials.

General Discussion
The six experiments reported in this article demonstrate that
previous failures to find RB for identical nonwords shown in
RSVP streams could be due to participants’ use of “informed
guessing” strategies combined with poor encoding of nonwords.
Experiment 1 replicated Coltheart and Langdon’s (2003) finding
of RB for words but a repetition advantage for nonwords. In
Experiment 2, participants performed a same/different matching
task in addition to identifying all the items; this task revealed that
participants can reliably discriminate between repeated and control
trials, perhaps on the basis of partial orthographic information.
Thus, participants who would be likely to guess repetitions on
repeated trials would not tend to do so on control trials because
they would have gleaned enough partial information from the
control trial to rule out a repetition. Indeed, encouraging the use of
informed guessing via the same/different task produced a repetition advantage for both words and nonwords.
In Experiments 1 and 2, it was not possible to distinguish
correctly perceived repetitions from guesses. Accordingly, in Experiments 3 and 4 we included trials containing orthographic
neighbor pairs; if participants were using informed guessing to
report repetitions, they might report cast and cast following a trial
containing the words cast and cart, providing evidence of guessing. Alternatively, including the neighbor trials might be expected
to discourage guessing by making it less efficacious. In fact, both
goals were achieved; the repetition advantage for nonwords found
in Experiments 1 and 2 was eliminated, suggesting that guessing
was decreased compared with that in the previous experiments, but
a substantial proportion of the participants still reported a repetition on at least one neighbor trial, validating our claim that
participants guess repetitions when they are informed that some

Table 6
Mean Percentages of Partial Recall of Critical and Intervening
Items for Word and Nonword Lists in the Control Condition in
Experiment 6
Item
List

C1

Intervening

C2

Word
Nonword

97
82

71
33

74
55

Note. C1 ⫽ first critical word; C2 ⫽ second critical word; Intervening ⫽
item intervening between C1 and C2.

163

trials will contain repeated items. In Experiment 4, we improved
the encoding effectiveness of the first critical item on nonword
trials by increasing its exposure duration. Significant RB was
found for repeated words, neighbor words, and neighbor nonwords
in both Experiments 3 and 4; significant RB was also found for
repeated nonwords in Experiment 4 when scores were corrected
for guessing.
One additional finding corroborates our contention that the
repetition advantage found in Experiments 1 and 2 was the result
of informed guessing. In the control condition of Experiments 1
and 2, low-N words were reported more accurately than were
high-N words, a finding that is thought to be an indicator of
guessing in perceptual identification (Snodgrass & Mintzer, 1993).
However, when guessing of repetitions was made less efficacious
via the inclusion of neighbor trials (Experiments 3 and 4) both the
repetition advantage and the low-N word advantage disappeared.
Thus, it appears that participants relied less on guessing of repetitions (and less on guessing in general) in Experiments 3 and 4
than in Experiments 1 and 2.
Finally, Experiments 5 and 6 demonstrated that RB for orthographic neighbor nonwords could still be obtained when no repeated items were present in the experiment. In addition, in Experiment 6, participants were asked to report the contents of each
trial aloud and to type their responses. This additional response
format allowed for further investigation of the partial orthographic
information available to participants in the control condition. Liberal scoring of these responses (counting an item as correct if at
least two letters were reported correctly) showed that although
participants had great difficulty reporting nonwords correctly, they
did perceive most of the letters from the nonwords. This enabled
them to avoid spurious repetition reports.
The results of these experiments have several important implications. First and foremost, these experiments show that RB can be
obtained for nonwords if appropriate procedures are used to detect
and correct for informed guessing of repetitions. Second, the
finding of RB for nonwords is consistent with the notion that RB
can have sublexical effects (Harris & Morris, 2001b, 2004; Morris
& Harris, 1999). Third, these results provide additional support for
the claim that orthographic and identity RB stem from the same
processes. Recall that some have claimed that identity RB should
only be found for lexically identical stimuli (Chialant & Caramazza, 1997; Coltheart & Langdon, 2003) and that other forms of
RB must be driven by a different process, such as residual lexical
inhibition. Evidence bearing on this claim comes from our analyses of report of the item intervening between C1 and C2. In each
of our experiments, we found a benefit for report of the intervening
item when it was displayed in the context of identical items or
orthographically similar items compared with control items. Coltheart and Langdon (2003) associated this intervening item effect
with priming; that is, processing of an identical C2 is facilitated,
leaving more resources for processing the intervening item. If,
however, orthographic RB represents lexical inhibition (rather than
priming) of C2, there should be no processing advantage for the
intervening item. Thus, we propose that finding an advantage for
the intervening item in identical and orthographically similar trials
is further evidence against the lexical inhibition account.
Our preferred account of RB phenomena is a more parsimonious
one. RB, whether for identical or orthographically similar words or
nonwords, is driven by sharpening of stimulus representations,

MORRIS AND STILL

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

164

which confers a benefit within the type recognition system but a
cost in the competition for awareness when items are rapidly
displayed (Morris et al., 2007). The competition hypothesis proposes that the intervening item effect emerges from these competitive interactions, wherein a repeated or orthographically similar
C2 is associated with less total activation than is a nonrepeated C2.
Because items must compete with adjacent items for access to
awareness, a C2 with relatively low activation will be outcompeted by the intervening item or by the following pattern mask
more often than will a nonrepeated C2, resulting in RB for C2 and
facilitation for the intervening item. Furthermore, the benefit for
the intervening item that emerges out of this competitive interaction should be smaller when C1 and C2 are merely orthographically similar than when they are identical, because similar items
contain some nonrepeated letters (the lack of identity at phonological and semantic levels may also decrease the size of the
intervening item effect).
The competition hypothesis also provides a principled explanation for the seemingly sporadic presence of RB for nonwords.
According to this account, the potential magnitude of RB is related
to the encoding effectiveness of the critical items. For example,
when C1 is well encoded, large RB effects are possible; conversely, a poorly encoded C1 will not produce RB (refer to
Figure 1 for an illustration). Because nonwords are infrequently
encountered, they are more difficult to encode than are words; thus
the potential RB one can find for nonwords is smaller than the
potential RB for words. Furthermore, poor encoding effectiveness
for nonwords means that performance in the control conditions is
generally low, meaning that even a small amount of guessing of
repetitions will have a much larger effect on RB for nonwords than
for words.
In addition to the clear implications that our results have for
theories of RB, they may also have implications for interpreting
results from priming paradigms comparing words and nonwords.
Although many researchers have focused on the most obvious
difference between words and nonwords—lexicality—this difference may bring with it other, perhaps unanticipated, differences.
For example, briefly displayed nonwords are encoded more poorly
than words; thus, dissociable performance between words and
nonwords on a task might not tell us as much about interactions
within the lexicon as it tells us about the effects of differing
amounts of noise in initial encoding. We believe this is the case in
the comparison of RB for words and nonwords.

References
Andrews, S. (1997). The effect of orthographic similarity on lexical retrieval: Resolving neighborhood conflicts. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 4, 439 – 461.
Balota, D. A., & Chumbley, J. I. (1984). Are lexical decisions a good
measure of lexical access? The role of word frequency in the neglected
decision stage. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception
and Performance, 10, 340 –357.
Bavelier, D., Prasada, S., & Segui, J. (1994). Repetition blindness between
words: Nature of the orthographic and phonological relationships involved. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 20, 1437–1455.
Baylis, G. C., & Rolls, E. T. (1987). Responses of neurons in the inferior
temporal cortex in short term and serial recognition memory tasks.
Experimental Brain Research, 65, 614 – 622.

Bodner, G. E., & Masson, M. E. J. (1997). Masked repetition priming of
words and nonwords: Evidence for a nonlexical basis for priming.
Journal of Memory and Language, 37, 268 –293.
Bowers, J. S. (1994). Does implicit memory extend to legal and illegal
nonwords? Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory,
and Cognition, 20, 534 –549.
Buckner, R. L., Goodman, J., Burock, M., Rotte, M., Koutstaal, W.,
Schacter, D., et al. (1998). Functional-anatomic correlates of object
priming in humans revealed by rapid presentation event-related fMRI.
Neuron, 20, 285–296.
Campbell, J. I. D., Fugelsang, J. A., & Hernberg, V. D. (2002). Effects of
lexicality and distinctiveness on repetition blindness. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 28, 948 –962.
Chialant, D., & Caramazza, A. (1997). Identity and similarity factors in
repetition blindness: Implications for lexical processing. Cognition, 63,
79 –119.
Cohen, J. D., MacWhinney, B., Flatt, M., & Provost, J. (1993). PsyScope:
A new graphic interactive environment for designing psychology experiments. Behavioral Research Methods, Instruments and Computers, 25,
257–271.
Coltheart, V., & Langdon, R. (2003). Repetition blindness for words yet
repetition advantage for nonwords. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 29, 171–185.
Dehaene, S., & Naccache, L. (2001). Towards a cognitive neuroscience of
consciousness: Basic evidence and a workspace framework. Cognition,
79, 1–37.
Dehaene, S., Naccache, L., Cohen, L., Le Bihan, D., Mangin, J.-F., Poline,
J.-B., & Rivière, D. (2001). Cerebral mechanisms of word masking and
unconscious repetition priming. Nature Neuroscience, 4, 752–758.
Desimone, R. (1996). Neural mechanisms for visual memory and their role
in attention. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
United States of America, 93, 13494 –13499.
Enns, J. T., & Di Lollo, V. (2000). What’s new in visual masking? Trends
in Cognitive Sciences, 4, 345–352.
Feustel, T. C., Shiffrin, R. M., & Salasoo, A. (1983). Episodic and lexical
contributions to the repetition effect in word identification. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 112, 309 –346.
Forster, K. I. (1970). Visual perception of rapidly presented word sequences of varying complexity. Perception & Psychophysics, 8, 215–
221.
Forster, K. I. (1998). The pros and cons of masked priming. Journal of
Psycholinguistic Research, 27, 203–233.
Francis, W. N., & Kučera, H. (1982). Frequency analysis of English usage:
Lexicon and grammar. Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
Harris, C. L. (2001). Are individual or consecutive letters the unit affected
by repetition blindness? Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 27, 761–774.
Harris, C. L., & Morris, A. L. (2000). Orthographic repetition blindness.
The Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Experimental Psychology, 53(A), 1039 –1060.
Harris, C. L., & Morris, A. L. (2001a). Identity and similarity in orthographic repetition blindness: No cross-over interaction. Cognition, 81,
1– 40.
Harris, C. L., & Morris, A. L. (2001b). Illusory words created by repetition
blindness. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 8, 118 –126.
Harris, C. L., & Morris, A. L. (2004). Repetition blindness occurs in
nonwords. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance, 30, 305–318.
Kanwisher, N. (1987). Repetition blindness: Type recognition without
token individuation. Cognition, 27, 117–143.
Kanwisher, N., & Potter, M. (1990). Repetition blindness: Levels of
processing. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception
and Performance, 16, 30 – 47.
Luo, C. R., & Caramazza, A. (1996). Temporal and spatial repetition

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

REPETITION BLINDNESS FOR NONWORDS
blindness: Effects of presentation mode and repetition lag on the perception of repeated items. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human
Perception and Performance, 22, 95–113.
Masson, M. E. J., Caldwell, J. I., & Whittlesea, B. W. A. (2000). When lust
is lost: Orthographic similarity effects in the encoding and reconstruction of rapidly presented word lists. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 26, 1005–1022.
Masson, M. E. J., & Isaak, M. I. (1999). Masked priming of words and
nonwords in a naming task: Further evidence for a nonlexical basis for
priming. Memory & Cognition, 27, 399 – 412.
Miller, E. K., & Desimone, R. (1994, January 28). Parallel neuronal
mechanisms for short-term memory. Science, 263, 520 –522.
Miller, E. K., Li, L., & Desimone, R. (1993). Activity of neurons in
anterior inferior temporal cortex during a short-term memory task. The
Journal of Neuroscience, 13, 1460 –1478.
Morris, A. L., & Harris, C. L. (1999). A sublexical locus for repetition
blindness: Evidence from illusory words. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 25, 1060 –1075.
Morris, A. L., & Harris, C. L. (2004). Repetition blindness: Out of sight or
out of mind? Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception
and Performance, 30, 913–922.
Morris, A. L., Still, M. L., & Caldwell-Harris, C. L. (2007). Repetition
blindness: An emergent property of inter-item competition. Manuscript
submitted for publication.
Park, J., & Kanwisher, N. (1994). Determinants of repetition blindness.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 20, 500 –519.

165

Rastle, K., Harrington, J., & Coltheart, M. (2002). 358,534 nonwords: The
ARC Nonword Database. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Experimental Psychology, 55(A), 1339 –1362.
Ringo, J. L. (1996). Stimulus specific adaptation in inferior temporal and
medial temporal cortex of the monkey. Behavioral Brain Research, 76,
191–197.
Snodgrass, J. G., & Mintzer, M. (1993). Neighborhood effects in visual
word recognition: Facilitatory or inhibitory? Memory & Cognition, 21,
247–266.
Subramaniam, S., Biederman, I., & Madigan, S. A. (2000). Accurate
identification but no priming and chance recognition memory for pictures in RSVP sequences. Visual Cognition, 7, 511–535.
Summerfield, C., Jack, A. I., & Burgess, A. P. (2002). Induced gamma
activity is associated with conscious awareness of pattern masked nouns.
International Journal of Psychophysiology, 44, 93–100.
Tononi, G., & Edelman, G. M. (1998, December 4). Consciousness and
complexity. Science, 282, 1846 –1851.
Verfaellie, M., Milberg, W. P., McGlinchey-Berroth, R., & Grande, L.
(1995). Comparison of cross-field matching and forced-choice identification in hemispatial neglect. Neuropsychology, 9, 427– 434.
Ward, L. M. (2003). Synchronous neural oscillations and cognitive processes. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 7, 553–559.
Wiggs, C. L., & Martin, A. (1998). Properties and mechanisms of perceptual priming. Current Opinion in Neurobiology, 8, 227–233.
Wolfe, J. M. (1999). Inattentional amnesia. In V. Coltheart (Ed.), Fleeting
memories (pp. 71–94). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

(Appendix follows)

MORRIS AND STILL

166

Appendix
Stimuli Used in Experiments 1 and 2
High-N words

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Control C1
cure
mink
halt
slot
sink
slot
sink
halt
cord
ward
rake
sane
cord
rice
ward
rice
sane
nest
tang
tang
nest
cure
rake
mink

High-N nonwords

Intervening

C2

Control C1

Intervening

C2

gift
safe
tire
dark
foul
grin
colt
nice
milk
crew
burn
cook
slim
toad
kick
talk
wind
king
ship
ripe
chin
slow
mood
doll

bash
bent
boss
cape
cast
dame
fade
fend
gate
gill
hoot
hull
hunk
lash
loan
loot
lust
mall
mite
mole
pace
pant
pill
rare

nove
hame
zear
hine
vang
cack
nove
hine
fing
vang
bink
lote
jass
zear
cack
fing
vate
kell
vate
jass
bink
lote
kell
hame

fusk
jush
pemp
brab
juff
yeel
blut
keer
trem
susk
vart
dafe
yine
grat
flep
yeap
smow
jark
meem
nush
tarb
filk
floy
voke

balt
beal
bick
cose
dile
dunt
fank
fass
halk
hile
hoon
kear
leck
lole
mive
mome
parn
pung
runk
tove
vame
vash
wase
yill

Low-N words
Control C1
glad
shut
jerk
shut
glad
twin
flag
knee
sigh
jerk
flag
stud
gasp
clue
knee
stud
sigh
gasp
romp
yelp
yelp
twin
romp
clue

Low-N nonwords

Intervening

C2

Control C1

Intervening

C2

boom
gaze
skin
disk
beer
lamp
joke
span
knot
plot
push
fair
zone
path
cash
gown
clay
horn
fist
tube
hurt
jump
flat
pond

ache
bird
blob
calf
crib
debt
dirt
dumb
foam
gulf
howl
inch
limb
loaf
loud
mesh
monk
numb
plug
quit
snag
soak
stem
surf

vont
narp
phub
cuzz
bleg
yasp
zeet
flun
visc
foap
preb
visc
cuzz
zeet
vont
telp
telp
preb
phub
yasp
narp
flun
foap
bleg

kime
hoil
vant
tabe
moof
bont
dran
mowl
graw
niss
goke
blad
lafe
foof
stad
rosh
zint
vath
jeal
feen
smag
boak
jint
kump

balp
beff
blom
dref
dwit
ferb
joom
kerp
kolf
lumb
nazz
nerk
noak
nurb
perb
pham
scoo
selm
snoy
soth
thim
vebb
yelf
zodd

Note. C1 ⫽ first critical word; C2 ⫽ second critical word; Intervening ⫽
item intervening between C1 and C2.

Received May 1, 2007
Revision received August 31, 2007
Accepted September 14, 2007 䡲

