Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition
2008, Vol. 34, No. 2, 302–312

Copyright 2008 by the American Psychological Association
0278-7393/08/$12.00 DOI: 10.1037/0278-7393.34.2.302

How Does Bilingualism Improve Executive Control? A Comparison of
Active and Reactive Inhibition Mechanisms
Lorenza S. Colzato

Maria Teresa Bajo

Leiden University

Granada University

Wery van den Wildenberg

Daniela Paolieri

University of Amsterdam

University of Trento

Sander Nieuwenhuis, Wido La Heij, and Bernhard Hommel
Leiden University
It has been claimed that bilingualism enhances inhibitory control, but the available evidence is
equivocal. The authors evaluated several possible versions of the inhibition hypothesis by comparing
monolinguals and bilinguals with regard to stop signal performance, inhibition of return, and the
attentional blink. These three phenomena, it can be argued, tap into different aspects of inhibition.
Monolinguals and bilinguals did not differ in stop signal reaction time and thus were comparable in
terms of active-inhibitory efficiency. However, bilinguals showed no facilitation from spatial cues,
showed a strong inhibition of return effect, and exhibited a more pronounced attentional blink. These
results suggest that bilinguals do not differ from monolinguals in terms of active inhibition but have
acquired a better ability to maintain action goals and to use them to bias goal-related information.
Under some circumstances, this ability may indirectly lead to more pronounced reactive inhibition
of irrelevant information.
Keywords: bilingualism, inhibition, executive functions

one’s thoughts at any given time and, thus, the ability to
suppress all but the currently preferred language. The constant
exercise of this inhibitory control, so the idea goes, provides
bilinguals with an enhanced ability to ignore distracting and
irrelevant stimuli, not only in language tasks but in general
cognitive processing (Bialystok, 2001; Bialystok et al., 2004).1
Even though some observations seem to be consistent with
the inhibition view (for an overview, see Bialystok et al., 2004),
some central findings, such as the reduced Simon effect in
bilinguals, seem notoriously difficult to replicate (see Bialystok
et al., 2004, for positive evidence based on group differences of
several hundreds of milliseconds and Bialystok, Martin, &
Viswanathan, 2005, and Bialystok, 2006, for failures to replicate). Moreover, the available accounts have not been particularly precise with regard to the mechanism underlying the
ability to inhibit irrelevant or unwanted information and representations. To get a clearer idea about the cognitive advantages

Speaking more than one language has many advantages.
Apart from the obvious extension of one’s opportunities to
communicate and to express oneself, there are less obvious
benefits. As numerous studies have shown, bilinguals at all ages
outperform monolinguals in several cognitive tasks and abilities, ranging from creativity tasks (Kessler & Quinn, 1987) and
problem solving (Bain, 1975) to perceptual disembedding problems (Duncan & De Avila, 1979) and the Simon task (Bialystok, Craik, Klein, & Viswanathan, 2004).
According to Green (1998) and Bialystok (2001; Bialystok et
al., 2004), being raised as a bilingual enhances one’s inhibitory
control. Being able to speak more than one language presupposes some sort of control over the language used to express

Lorenza S. Colzato, Sander Nieuwenhuis, Wido La Heij, and Bernhard
Hommel, Institute for Psychological Research and Leiden Institute for
Brain and Cognition, Leiden University, Leiden, the Netherlands; Maria
Teresa Bajo, Department of Psychology, Granada University, Granada,
Spain; Wery van den Wildenberg, Department of Psychology, University
of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, the Netherlands; Daniela Paolieri, Department
of Cognitive Sciences and Education, University of Trento, Trento, Italy.
The work of Wery van den Wildenberg and Sander Nieuwenhuis was
supported by the Netherlands Organization for Scientific Research.
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Bernhard
Hommel, Department of Psychology, Cognitive Psychology Unit, P.O.
Box 9555, Leiden University, Leiden 2300 RB, the Netherlands. E-mail:
hommel@fsw.leidenuniv.nl

1
In more recent publications, Bialystok and colleagues have considered
the possibility that bilingualism benefits executive processes other than
inhibitory control, such as response suppression and task switching (e.g.,
Bialystok, Craik, & Ryan, 2006) or context monitoring (Bialystok, Craik,
& Ruocco, 2006). However, the present study was motivated by, and thus
focuses on, the original claim of an inhibitory-control benefit for bilinguals.

302

BILINGUALISM AND REACTIVE INHIBITION

that bilinguals enjoy, we tested the implications of two different
ways that inhibitory control may be exerted.2
Let us consider how a target code (target, in short) is selected
against an alternative distractor code (noise, in short). As shown in
Figure 1, target and noise (e.g., a word in the current language and
a word in the alternative language) will compete for selection,
which is indicated by the mutually inhibitory link between them
(b). Resolving this competition requires some sort of bias that
either supports the target or hampers the noise, or both. According
to the inhibition view suggested by Green (1998), bilinguals resolve competitions of that sort by inhibiting the noise (e.g., words
in the alternative language), as indicated by the inhibitory link
from the hypothetical inhibitory system to the noise code (c).
Henceforth, we refer to this view as active inhibition, thereby
indicating that the inhibition is not due to local inhibitory connections but to the intervention of a separate, central inhibitory system
(in Green’s model, the “language task schema”).
Extended experience in inhibiting noise may generalize to nonlanguage codes and thus may benefit any task in which targets
need to be selected against noise. If so, this suggests that bilinguals
should be good active inhibitors. We tested this hypothesis in
Experiment 1 by comparing monolinguals and bilinguals in the
classical stop signal task, a task that has been developed to investigate and that has been shown to be indicative of active inhibitory
control (Logan, 1994; Logan & Cowan, 1984).
However, as Figure 1 shows, inhibiting noise is not the only way
that selection can be successfully biased. Instead of, or in addition
to, actively inhibiting competing codes, the target code may be
directly strengthened. As suggested by Desimone and Duncan
(1995), representations of the task goal may support codes that are
consistent with it, as indicated by the facilitative link between the

inhibitory
system

goal

(c)

(a)

"frog"

"kikker"

(b)
Figure 1. Possible mechanisms involved in selecting a word from one of
two competing languages (English and Dutch). The target word (frog) is
supported by the goal representation through a facilitatory connection (a).
Activating frog inhibits its Dutch equivalent, kikker, through a reactive
inhibitory link (b). The incorrect Dutch word may also be actively inhibited
through an inhibitory control system (c).

303

hypothetical goal system and the target code (a). Supporting the
target code not only increases its activation but could inhibit the
noise code via the inhibitory link (b). According to this logic and
using the terminology of Logan (1994), bilinguals may have
learned to suppress (words from) the currently unwanted, alternative language indirectly, through local reactive inhibition, but not
“actively.”3 That is, bilinguals may not be particularly good inhibitors, but they may be good at maintaining the task goal, so as
to provide stronger support for target representations. This view is
consistent with other proposals of how bilinguals control their
languages. For instance, it is in line with the “complex access,
simple selection” view proposed by La Heij (2005; see also Poulisse & Bongaerts, 1994), in which no active inhibition of words in
the unwanted language is assumed. It is also in line with Dijkstra
and van Heuven’s bilingual interactive-activation model, in which
representations of words from alternative languages compete for
attention (Dijkstra & van Heuven, 1998; Van Heuven, Dijkstra, &
Grainger, 1998) and competition within and across languages is
resolved by lateral inhibition. Thus, inhibitory effects may not
necessarily be caused by a dedicated inhibitory control system or
executive control function but, rather, may result from supporting
(priming) relevant information in a highly competitive system. In
other words, and somewhat paradoxically, what has been referred
to as inhibitory control may be achieved by mechanisms that work
through facilitation. We conducted Experiments 2 and 3 to test the
implications of such a goal-maintenance view by comparing
monolinguals and bilinguals with regard to the inhibition of return
task and the attentional blink.

Experiment 1 (Stop Signal)
In the standard stop signal task (Logan & Cowan, 1984), participants are first presented with a stimulus telling them to execute
a particular response, which may be followed by a stop signal
calling for the immediate abortion of that response. Versions of
this task have been used to investigate the efficiency with which
various sorts of cognitive processes can be stopped, and so performance on the task can be considered to diagnose the individual
efficiency of actively inhibiting one’s “thoughts and actions” (Logan, 1994; Logan & Cowan, 1984). In our version of the task,
participants responded to the direction of a green arrow by pressing a button with the left or right index finger. The stop signal was
2
Note that, as did MacLeod, Dodd, Sheard, Wilson, and Bibi (2003), we
explicitly focused on the origin or cause of inhibition (i.e., whether inhibition is produced by a separate “inhibitory control” system or emerges
from the interaction of local codes) rather than on inhibitory effects or
functions. As we argue later in this article, these aspects are logically
different and independent, even though most authors fail to distinguish
between them and commonly take for granted that inhibitory effects (e.g.,
withholding a primed response) must be produced by “suppression” exerted by some inhibitory control system (e.g., Bialystok, Craik, & Ryan,
2006; Logan, 1994). Instead of taking this connection for granted, we
sought for empirical evidence that supported or challenged it.
3
Note that Green’s (1998) use of the term reactive inhibition differs
from Logan’s (1994) use and, thus, our own. Whereas in Green’s model
reactive refers to the moment at which inhibition is applied (by a central
inhibitory system), we use the term to refer to local (lateral) inhibitory links
between activated word representations.

304

COLZATO ET AL.

a sudden and unpredictable change of the arrow to red, which
signaled a deliberate effort to refrain from responding. The performance in the stop signal paradigm can be conceptualized in
terms of a race, in which the stop process and the go process
compete to finish first (see Logan & Cowan, 1984). If the stop
process finishes before the go process does, the response is inhibited. By contrast, if the go process finishes before the stop process
does, the response is executed.
To be successful, inhibitory processes have to win a race against
concurrent response processes. If the inhibitory processes finish
before the response processes do, the response is aborted. The stop
signal reaction time (SSRT; see Figure 2) can be computed as an
index of inhibitory efficiency (Logan, 1994). If bilinguals are
better inhibitors than monolinguals are, they should show significantly shorter SSRTs than monolinguals do.

Method
Participants. Thirty-two healthy young adults served as participants for partial fulfillment of course credit or for a financial
reward and constituted the two language groups: monolingual and
bilingual. All reported having normal or corrected-to-normal vision, and all were unfamiliar with the purpose of the experiment.
Half of the participants were monolingual Spanish speakers who
lived in Spain, and the other half were Dutch–English bilinguals
who lived in the Netherlands. All participants were tested by the
same instructional protocols, although the actual testing was carried out in two different countries. The bilingual participants grew
up in “mixed” families (with one parent speaking Dutch and the
other speaking English or German), and some of them had lived
part of their life in an English-speaking country. They used both
Dutch and English on a daily basis throughout their lives. As
research with bilingual adults (Kroll & Stewart, 1994) and children
(Bialystok, 1988) has revealed that the cognitive and linguistic
consequences of bilingualism are more salient for those bilinguals
who are relatively balanced in their proficiency, we considered
only balanced bilinguals for the present study. The monolingual

Figure 2. Estimation of stop signal reaction time (RT) according to a race
model (Logan, 1994; Logan & Cowan, 1984). The curve depicts the
distribution of RTs on choice trials (trials without a stop signal), which
represent the finishing times of the response processes. If independence of
choice and stop processes is assumed, the finishing time of the stop process
bisects the choice RT distribution. Given that the button-press response
could be withheld in 50% of stop trials, stop signal RT (200 ms) is
calculated by subtracting the mean stop signal delay (100 ms) from the
median choice RT (300 ms).

Spanish speakers were not functionally fluent in any other language, despite the inevitable language courses in school. All
participants in both groups attended university and shared similar
middle-class socioeconomic backgrounds, and they were matched
for age, gender, and IQ (measured by Raven’s Standard Progressive Matrices; see Table 1).
Apparatus and stimuli. The Spanish participants were tested
with a laptop PC (Asus A3Ac with a 15.1-in. monitor), and the
Dutch participants were tested with a desktop PC (Switch attached
to a Philips 17-in. Real Flat monitor). Responses were made by
pressing the Z or ? keys of the QWERTY computer keyboard with
the left and right index finger, respectively. Participants were
required to react quickly and accurately by pressing the left or right
key in response to the direction of a left- or right-pointing green
arrow (choice trials) about 3.5 ⫻ 2.0 cm in length.
Procedure and design. The experiment consisted of a 30-min
session, in which participants completed a version of the task
adopted from van den Wildenberg et al. (2006). Arrows were
presented pseudorandomly, with the constraint that they signaled
left- and right-hand responses equally often. Arrow presentation
was response terminated. Intervals between subsequent choice
signals varied randomly but equiprobably, from 1,250 ms to 1,750
ms in steps of 125 ms. During these interstimulus intervals, a white
fixation point (3 mm in diameter) was presented. The green arrow
changed to red during 30% of the trials, upon which the choice
response had to be aborted (stop trials). We used a staircasetracking procedure that dynamically adjusted the delay between
the onset of the choice signal and the onset of the stop signal for
each hand separately to control inhibition probability (Levitt,
1971). After a successfully inhibited stop trial, stop signal delay
increased by 35 ms in the next stop trial, whereas when the
participant was unable to stop, the stop signal delay decreased by
35 ms in the next stop trial. This algorithm ensured that motor
actions were successfully inhibited in about half of the stop trials,
which yielded accurate estimates of SSRT (Band, van der Molen,
& Logan, 2003; see Figure 2). The algorithm compensated for
differences in choice RT between participants, between stimulation conditions, and between the left and right hands. The stop task
consisted of five blocks of 104 trials, the first of which served as
a practice block and allowed us to obtain stable participant performance.
Language background questionnaire. To check whether our
selection criteria had been met, we asked bilingual participants to
fill out a questionnaire on language use and fluency in their two
languages. The questionnaire addresses the percentage usage of
each language at home, at work, with friends, and overall, and the
responses indicate the extent to which each language is used daily
and the degree to which the participant is functionally bilingual.
The self-evaluated proficiency scores of the Dutch–English bilinguals are shown in Table 2. Following the procedure used by
Costa, Kovacic, Franck, and Caramazza (2003), we obtained the
proficiency scores by a self-evaluation through the questionnaire
the participants had filled out before the experiment. The scores
are on a 10-point scale, in which 10 represents native-speaker level
and 1 represents complete ignorance of the language. Other studies
have shown that similar self-report measures correspond well with
performance measures of proficiency, such as RT on a verbal
categorization task (Dufour & Kroll, 1995; Kroll, Michael, Tokowicz, & Dufour, 2002).

BILINGUALISM AND REACTIVE INHIBITION

305

Table 1
Demographic Data Measures and Standard Deviations for the Monolingual (Mon) and Bilingual
(Bil) Groups
Experiment 1

Experiment 2

Experiment 3

Measure

Mon

Bil

Mon

Bil

Mon

Bil

N (male/female)
IQ, M (SD)
Age, M (SD)

16 (4:12)
110 (5.3)
22 (2.3)

16 (4:12)
113 (5.4)
22 (2.8)

18 (5:13)
—
22 (2.7)

18 (5:13)
—
22 (3.6)

18 (2:16)
110 (3.9)
22 (0.8)

18 (3:15)
111 (6.5)
23 (3.6)

Note.

Age is in years. A dash indicates that no data were available.

Results
We tested group differences by means of an analysis of variance
(ANOVA). Median RT on go signal showed that bilinguals (RT ⫽
401 ms) did not react significantly faster than monolinguals did
(RT ⫽ 433 ms), F(1, 30) ⫽ 2.10, p ⫽ .15, MSE ⫽ 3.922. We
examined mean SSRTs to determine whether inhibition efficiency
differed between the groups. SSRTs were estimated separately for
each participant and for each group. Overall, participants were able
to stop their responses successfully about half the time when a stop
signal instructed them to do so. Participants were able to stop on
about half of the stop signal trials (49% in monolinguals and 48%
in bilinguals, F ⬍ 1), which indicates that the dynamic tracking
algorithm worked well in both groups. The percentage of choice
errors to go signals was low and did not discriminate between
monolinguals (1.4%) and bilinguals (2.6%), F(1, 30) ⫽ 1.44, p ⫽
.24, MSE ⫽ 8.273. Most important, SSRTs were not significantly
different in the two language groups (219 ms and 228 ms, respectively, for the bilinguals and monolinguals), F(1, 30) ⬍ 1, MSE ⫽
1.604.

Discussion
Experiment 1 tested the idea that learning to manage multiple
languages requires speakers to develop active inhibition skills,
which may in turn transfer to nonlingual cognitive processes. If so,
bilinguals should outperform monolinguals in tasks (e.g., the stop
task) that tap into active inhibition mechanisms. However, the
absence of anything even close to a reliable difference in SSRT
between the two experimental groups leaves little room for the
assumption that bilinguals are better inhibitors than are monolinguals, at least with respect to the inhibitory processes assessed by
the stop signal task.

Experiment 2 (Inhibition of Return)
The outcome of Experiment 1 does not support the hypothesis of
better active inhibition skills in bilinguals, or at least not the
hypothesis that such skills generalize to nonlingual tasks. However, it is difficult to interpret negative outcomes, especially in the
absence of detailed theoretical approaches. We therefore aimed at
providing converging evidence by making use of another phenomenon that has been linked to inhibitory processes: inhibition of
return (IOR; see Klein, 2000, for an overview). As Posner and
Cohen (1984) have shown, cuing the location of a visual target by
means of a randomly varying, peripheral stimulus (e.g., a flash at
the location where the target will occur) improves performance at

short stimulus onset asynchronies (SOAs) but impairs performance
at longer SOAs.
The benefit of spatial cuing at short SOAs is commonly attributed to the potency of abrupt onsets to attract visual attention; even
randomly varying (and therefore uninformative) onset cues have
been assumed to attract attention to their location, which provides
a processing advantage for the target if it appears at the same
location (Posner, 1980). That is, the first phase of cuing is commonly considered to be automatic and beneficial. The second
phase is more controversial. The costs of spatial cuing at long
SOAs have been interpreted as reflecting a foraging mechanism
that supports natural searching behavior by inhibiting previously
attended locations (Klein, 1988); as constituting a bias against
responding to these locations (Fuentes, Vivas, & Humphreys,
1999); or as reflecting both attentional and motor factors (Taylor &
Klein, 2000). In any case, the inhibitory nature of the second phase
of cuing suggests that it is related to inhibitory mechanisms.
Indeed, recent findings have demonstrated that IOR interacts with
stop signal performance (i.e., SSRT; Ivanoff & Taylor, 2006;
Taylor & Ivanoff, 2003).
If IOR taps into the type of inhibitory skill that bilinguals are
assumed to have acquired, randomly varying, peripheral spatial
cues should affect monolinguals and bilinguals differently. Although both groups should show comparable performance at short
SOAs (i.e., cuing benefits if cue and target appear in quick succession), bilinguals should show a more pronounced IOR (cuing
costs) at longer SOAs than monolinguals do.

Table 2
Self-Evaluated Proficiency Scores of the Dutch–English
Bilinguals
Experiment 1

Experiment 2

Experiment 3

Self-evaluated
proficiency

M

SD

M

SD

M

SD

Production
Comprehension
Writing
Reading

8.62
9.25
8.56
9.06

1.02
0.93
1.03
0.85

8.66
9.39
8.23
9.00

0.97
0.77
0.84
0.84

8.73
9.26
8.31
8.95

0.73
0.93
1.06
0.85

Note. The proficiency scores were obtained by self-evaluation through a
questionnaire the participants filled out before the experiment. The scores
are on a 10-point scale, in which 10 represents native-speaker level and 1
represents complete ignorance of the language.

COLZATO ET AL.

306

+

_
X

X

+

+
+
>>>
+

e
T im
Response (until Response or
2000 ms)
Target (100 ms)

SOA (100/400/700/1000 ms)
Cue (50 ms)
Fixation cross (1000
mx)

Figure 3.

Experimental trial sequence, from bottom left to top right. SOA ⫽ stimulus onset asynchrony.

Method
Participants. We recruited 18 volunteers for each of the two
language groups by applying the same criteria and matching procedures for all demographic data measures, other than intelligence,
that we had used in Experiment 1 (see Tables 1 and 2). The
balanced bilingual group comprised 12 bilingual participants from
Experiment 1 and 6 additional Dutch–English bilinguals. The
monolingual group comprised 18 new participants. As in Experiment 1, the bilingual participants were tested in the Netherlands
and the monolingual participants were tested in Spain.
Apparatus and stimuli. All participants were tested with standard desktop PCs. Participants faced three square gray outlines,
vertically arranged, as illustrated in Figure 3. From the viewing
distance of about 60 cm, each of these frames measured 2.6° ⫻
3.1°. Either a vertical line (0.1° ⫻ 0.6°) or a horizontal line (0.3°
⫻ 0.1°) served as the target, which was presented in light gray in
the top or bottom frame. The boxes were displayed in light gray on
a black background. On every trial, at varying temporal intervals
before presentation of the target, one of the two boxes thickened
briefly. This change gave the impression of a brief flicker, which
is referred to hereafter as the attentional cue. Responses to the
target were made by pressing the left or right shift key of the
computer keyboard with the corresponding index finger.
Procedure and design. The experiment was modeled after
that of Lupiàñez, Milliken, Solano, Weaver, and Tipper (2001)
and consisted of a 30-min session. The sequence of events
during each trial was as follows: A fixation point was displayed
with the three boxes for 1,000 ms, and then the attentional cue
appeared for 50 ms. Following the cue, the fixation point and
the boxes remained on the screen for 50, 350, 650, or 950 ms.
The target, a horizontal or vertical line, was then displayed for
33 ms, after which the fixation point and the empty boxes were
displayed until the participant had responded or 2,000 ms had
passed. The next trial began 1,000 ms later. A 1000-Hz
computer-generated tone that lasted 100 ms served as error
feedback. Half of the participants responded to the vertical and
horizontal lines by pressing the left and right keys, respectively,
while the other half received the opposite mapping. Participants
were instructed to press the response key on the keyboard as
quickly as possible and were not informed of the presence of the
cue or of the SOA manipulation. All possible combinations of
the cue location and target location variables were presented
randomly within a block of trials. The experiment was composed of eight blocks containing 40 trials each. Participants

were instructed to press the space bar to continue the experimental session.

Results
Trials with RTs faster than 100 ms or slower than 900 ms (0.9%
of the trials) and trials on which an error was made were excluded
from the RT analysis. RTs and percentages of errors (PEs) were
analyzed by means of ANOVAs, with cuing (cued vs. uncued) and
SOA (100, 400, 700, or 1,000 ms) as within-participant factors and
group (monolingual vs. bilingual) as a between-participants factor
(see Table 3 for means). One monolingual participant was excluded by the analysis because of low performance (PEs higher
than 35%).
When we replicated the relevant observations from the comparable discrimination task with mixed SOA blocks, as used by
Lupiàñez et al. (2001),4 our RT analysis yielded four reliable
effects: a main effect of SOA, F(3, 99) ⫽ 67.02, p ⬍ .0001,
MSE ⫽ 756; an interaction between SOA and cuing, F(3, 99) ⫽
7.36, p ⬍ .001, MSE ⫽ 333; an interaction between group and
cuing, F(1, 33) ⫽ 7.35, p ⫽ .011, MSE ⫽ 557; and an interaction
between SOA and group, F(3, 99) ⫽ 3.80, p ⫽ .013, MSE ⫽ 756.
As shown in Figure 4A, when averaged across language groups,
RTs decreased with SOA; the cuing effect turned from a benefit at
short SOAs to a cost at 700 ms SOA and recovered at the longest
SOA. Hence, we obtained IOR. However, even if the three-way
interaction of SOA, cuing, and group was not significant, cuing
seemed to affect the two language groups differently; for example,
the average cuing effect was negative for bilinguals (⫺4 ms) and
positive for monolinguals (10 ms). To get a better grip on the
overall pattern, we computed individual cuing effects for each
SOA (see Figure 4B for means).
The error rates analysis did not yield any significant effects.

Discussion
Experiment 2 tested the hypothesis that bilinguals show a stronger IOR effect. On the one hand, it is clear that the predictions
were not confirmed (e.g., that bilinguals do not differ from mono4

A difference between the two studies was that our participants recovered somewhat faster from inhibition of return at the longest SOA than
participants in the Lupiàñez, Milliken, Solano, Weaver, & Tipper (2001)
study did. This finding should not affect the interpretation of our results.

BILINGUALISM AND REACTIVE INHIBITION

307

Table 3
Mean Reaction Times (RTs) and Standard Deviations for Responses to the Target and
Percentages of Errors (PEs) on R2, as a Function of Language Group and the SOAs
Bilingual

Monolingual

Cued

Uncued

Cued

Uncued

SOA

RT

PE

RT

PE

RT

PE

RT

PE

100

573
(74)
525
(56)
519
(74)
507
(82)

5.69
(6.5)
4.58
(5.5)
4.17
(5.0)
5.28
(4.6)

581
(72)
522
(63)
502
(66)
501
(67)

5.83
(5.6)
5.00
(4.5)
4.58
(4.3)
3.19
(3.8)

569
(64)
539
(53)
537
(62)
537
(57)

1.91
(2.1)
1.76
(2.3)
1.91
(2.1)
1.47
(1.9)

594
(72)
559
(62)
531
(57)
542
(60)

1.91
(1.9)
1.91
(2.4)
2.35
(3.6)
0.88
(1.2)

400
700
1,000

Note. Values in parentheses represent standard deviations. RTs are in milliseconds. SOA ⫽ stimulus onset
asynchrony.

Figure 4. A: Mean reaction time (RT) across stimulus onset asynchrony
(SOA) as a function of language group and repetition versus alternation of
the cue. B: Time course of cuing effects (facilitation and IoR), calculated
as the difference between RT uncued and RT cued, as a function of the
language group (bilingual vs. monolingual). IoR ⫽ inhibition of return.

linguals by having a more pronounced shift from cuing benefits to
cuing costs at longer SOAs). Instead, bilinguals and monolinguals
have very similar SOA functions, but bilinguals show more costs
than benefits overall. On the other hand, it is clear that cuing
effects were affected by bilingualism, even though the way they
were affected was unexpected. There are several theoretical options that may account for this outcome pattern.
One theoretical option saves the active inhibition hypothesis by
assuming that cue-induced facilitation (at short SOAs) and costs
(at long SOAs) are produced by different and independent processes. So, as soon as a stimulus is registered, the facilitatory and
inhibitory processes start, and their relative strengths determine the
shape of the SOA function. In monolinguals, the facilitatory process may start out stronger than the inhibitory process does, but it
decays with increasing SOA, thus letting the costs increase over
time. In contrast, bilinguals may have more pronounced inhibitory
processes, just as the active inhibition hypothesis maintains; thus,
there is a net effect of zero as long as the facilitatory process
contributes, and the net effect becomes more and more negative as
the SOA increases. This scenario could explain our observations,
but the assumption that facilitatory and inhibitory processes are
unrelated does not seem to fit with the theoretical considerations
discussed in the literature (apart from raising the question why no
effect was found in Experiment 1). If IOR reflects a foraging
mechanism that prevents the repeated attentional scrutinization of
an event (Klein, 1988) or the repeated response to it (Fuentes et al.,
1999), why would the prevention begin after no more than 100 ms,
at a time when processing of even the first stimulus is unlikely to
be complete? In fact, a system with independent facilitatory and
inhibitory processes would always run into the danger of impairing
its own stimulus processing and/or response selection mechanisms.
An alternative approach can make use of the integration hypothesis suggested by Lupiàñez et al. (2001), who observed that the
point in time when cue-induced facilitation turns into costs varies
systematically with task difficulty. For instance, costs occur at
later SOAs if the target is more difficult to identify. As Lupiàñez
et al. pointed out, this systematic variation suggests that people are
able to control the size of the temporal integration window they
use to construct stimulus representations or object files, in the

COLZATO ET AL.

308

sense described by Kahneman, Treisman, and Gibbs (1992). The
wider the chosen window, according to Lupiàñez et al., the more
likely that cue and target will be integrated into the same representation and thereby prime each other—an assumption that has
received support in a recent electrophysiological study (Akyürek,
Riddell, Toffanin, & Hommel, 2007). In contrast, the smaller the
window, the more likely that cue and target will be integrated into
different representations. If cue and target share location information, some sort of competition and, hence, costs may occur. In fact,
repetition of some but not all features of an object has been found
to impair performance in numerous tasks and paradigms (for an
overview, see Hommel, 2004).
From this perspective, our outcome may point to two, not
necessarily mutually exclusive, interpretations. It may be that
bilinguals tend to have shorter temporal integration windows,
which would enable them to create more distinct stimulus representations.5 If so, they might always create different representations for the cue and the target, so that facilitation would never
occur. Alternatively or in addition, bilinguals may have more
reactive inhibition between competing representations. If so, the
conflict between cue representations and target representations
would lead to more inhibition of the losing competitor (the cue)
and its features. As a consequence, repetition of location (or any
other feature) would tend to produce more negative consequences
in bilinguals than in monolinguals.
In view of these theoretical possibilities, Experiment 2 must be
considered helpful but inconclusive. Hence, on the one hand, we
were able to demonstrate that bilingualism affects performance in
a task that taps into inhibitory processes (in an arguably more
direct way than had previous tasks), but, on the other hand, the
outcome pattern did not allow us to distinguish between active and
reactive inhibition.

Experiment 3 (Attentional Blink)
The major obstacle to experimental discrimination between active and reactive inhibition is that the mechanisms can commonly
be suspected to serve the same purpose: that is, to suppress
unwanted information. This is true for the Simon task (Bialystok,
2006; Bialystok et al., 2004, 2005), where the aim of both active
and reactive inhibitory mechanisms would be to suppress the often
misleading (and task-irrelevant) stimulus location, and for the
cuing task used in our Experiment 2, where it was just as reasonable to suppress the randomly varying cue location. To circumvent
this logical problem, we thought of an experimental task in which
active inhibition makes little sense but reactive inhibition is nevertheless likely to occur. According to our reasoning, tasks producing the so-called attentional blink (AB; Raymond, Shapiro, &
Arnell, 1992) meet these criteria.
The AB occurs when two masked (or otherwise difficult to
identify) target stimuli appear in close temporal proximity, such as
in RSVP (rapid serial visual presentation) tasks with varying lags
between the two targets. If the first target (T1) is identified
correctly, people have great difficulty in reporting the second
target (T2) when it occurs within an interval of about 100 –500 ms
after T1. Despite minor (often rather metaphorically expressed)
details, most of the available approaches assume that processing
and consolidating T1 occupies attentional mechanisms to a degree
that means too little attention is left for processing and consoli-

dating T2 if it appears before the consolidation of T1 is complete
(for an overview, see Shapiro, 2001). However, recent observations are inconsistent with the assumption of a structural bottleneck (Colzato, Spapè, Pannebakker, & Hommel, 2007; Di Lollo,
Kawahara, Ghorashi, & Enns, 2005; Hommel et al., 2006). For
instance, people can report more than two targets when these
targets are presented in a sequence (Di Lollo et al., 2005), which
suggests that it is the presence of distractors between two given
targets that is responsible for the blink. Hence, at least part of the
AB seems to represent a side effect of a mechanism that shields
targets against the impact of distractors, as does the mechanism
sketched in Figure 1. Indeed, Shapiro, Schmitz, Martens, Hommel,
and Schnitzler (2006) observed a trade-off between the amount of
resources devoted to T1 processing and the probability of missing
T2. In particular, participants who showed more attention-related
brain activity while processing T1 were more likely to fail to report
T2 in the blink interval. This finding fits with the observation that
a more relaxed attitude toward the task improves performance on
T2 (Olivers & Nieuwenhuis, 2005). It is also consistent with the
finding that successful report of T2 in the interval that typically
produces a blink is accompanied by a dramatic suppression of
brain responses to the distractors that intervene between T1 and T2
(Gross et al., 2004). In other words, the AB reflects the efficiency
of noise suppression. Taken altogether, these studies suggest that
people differ in the amount of attention they devote to the processing of a selected target stimulus and that this difference directly translates into their ability or inability to process a temporally close stimulus.
Getting back to our main question, these findings mean that
people can indeed be suspected to differ with respect to how much
support they provide for a to-be-selected stimulus event and/or
how much reactive inhibition this support exerts on competitors
(Routes a and b in Figure 1). This support would vary even under
conditions in which the competitor is also a target, a fact that
renders the presence of active inhibition (Route c) implausible. If
so, we would be in the position of making a counterintuitive and
rather surprising prediction: To the degree that they produce stronger reactive inhibition, bilinguals should exhibit worse performance (that is, a greater blink) in the AB task than monolinguals
should. We tested this prediction by comparing performance of
bilinguals and monolinguals in a standard RSVP task with two
target stimuli.

Method
Participants. We recruited 18 volunteers for each of the two
language groups by applying the criteria and matching procedures
5
At this point, this is only a logical possibility, and one may ask why
bilinguals would use shorter integration windows. Even though we are not
theoretically committed with regard to this point, it may be that shorter
windows are just one mechanism subserving a general tendency of bilinguals to emphasize differences rather than commonalities between represented events (cf. Suls & Wheeler, 2007, for an overview of contrast
effects). Again, this tendency would serve to make representations of the
two acquired languages more distinct and thus easier to separate. Other
mechanisms might lead to a stronger weighting of unshared rather than
shared features in priming tasks, but more systematic research is necessary
to test that possibility.

BILINGUALISM AND REACTIVE INHIBITION

used in Experiment 1 (see Tables 1 and 2). The balanced bilingual
group comprised 12 bilingual participants from Experiment 1 and
6 additional Dutch–English bilinguals. The monolingual group
comprised 18 new participants. Three monolingual participants
were excluded from the analysis because of excessive error rates
(⬎80%) on T1.6 As in Experiments 1 and 2, the bilingual participants were tested in the Netherlands and the monolingual participants were tested in Spain.
Apparatus and stimuli. The experiment was controlled by a
standard desktop computer. All stimuli were presented in a resolution of 800 ⫻ 600 pixels in 16-bit color on a 17-in. CRT that
refreshed at 100 Hz. Participants were seated at a viewing distance
of about 50 cm. The fixation mark (⫹) and all RSVP items were
presented centrally in black on a gray background (RGB 128, 128,
128). Each item was set in 16-point Times New Roman font.
Letters were drawn randomly without replacement from the full
alphabet. Digits were drawn from 1 to 9.
Procedure and design. In the RSVP task, participants were
asked to identify and report two digits (T1 and T2) presented in a
stream of letter distractors. After they had read the instructions,
which included a slow demonstration of the RSVP, and had
indicated that they fully understood the task, participants were
required to go through 24 trials of training. If more than 50% of the
responses were incorrect during the training, the training runs were
repeated.
An initial fixation addition sign, which was shown for 2,000 ms,
marked the beginning of each trial. After a blank interval of 250
ms, the RSVP commenced; it consisted of 20 items with a duration
of 40 ms each and an interstimulus interval of 40 ms. A full session
lasted 30 min and contained 360 trials (three locations of T1 ⫻ 4
lags ⫻ 30 repetitions). Lag was determined by the number of items
between T1 and T2. We randomly varied T1 position between
Positions 7, 8, and 9 of the stream to reduce the predictability of
target onsets. T2 was presented directly thereafter (Lag 1) or after
another two, four, or seven distractors (Lags 3, 5, and 8 successively; see Figure 5). Participants were to report both targets
directly after the RSVP by pressing the corresponding digit key on
the computer keyboard.

309

Figure 5. Events in a rapid serial visual presentation trial. The stimulus
onset asynchrony was 80 ms, and the blank interstimulus interval was 40
ms (i.e., each stimulus appeared for 40 ms). The two-digit targets in the
letter stream (T1, T2) were separated by one, three, five, or eight nontargets
after T1; the number of nontargets defined the lag. The first digit was
presented as either the fourth or the fifth display.

Bischof, & Di Lollo, 1999); dropped as soon as at least one
distractor appeared between the two targets (i.e., at Lag 3); and
recovered slowly with increasing lag. However, it is obvious that
this blink around Lag 3 was more pronounced in bilinguals than it
was in monolinguals. Indeed, when we compared the size of the
blink around Lag 3 obtained for the participants in the two groups
in a t test, the difference was clearly significant, t(31) ⫽ ⫺2.15,
p ⫽ .039 (two-tailed).

Discussion
Results
Two measures were computed individually and as a function of
lag between T1 and T2: the (unconditional) percentage of trials on
which T1 was correctly reported and the conditional percentage of
correct T2 reports given that T1 was reported (T2|T1). An
ANOVA of T1 accuracy with language group varying between
participants and lag varying within participants yielded a main
effect of lag, F(3, 93) ⫽ 203.72, p ⫽ .0001, MSE ⫽ 0.005, but no
other effects. As shown in Figure 6A, performance dropped at the
shortest lag, a common observation that indicates T1 and T2
compete for selection if they appear in direct succession (Hommel
& Akyürek, 2005; Potter, Staub, & O’Connor, 2002).
More important for our purposes was performance on T2. An
ANOVA of conditional T2 report revealed a significant effect of
lag, F(3, 93) ⫽ 38.76, p ⫽ .001, MSE ⫽ 0.009, that was involved
in a two-way interaction with group, F(3, 93) ⫽ 5.23, p ⫽ .002,
MSE ⫽ 0.009. As shown in Figure 6B, a standard AB was obtained
in both groups: Performance was good when the two targets
appeared in direct succession, the so-called Lag-1 sparing (Visser,

Experiment 3 was carried out to test whether bilinguals would
show more reactive inhibition in reporting two targets from a
RSVP stream than monolinguals would. If they did, they should
exhibit a larger AB, that is, a more pronounced decrement in
performance at shorter lags. This is exactly what we observed: The
two language groups were comparable in most measures, but
bilinguals showed a larger dip of T2 report—a bigger blink, that
is—at Lag 3. As it made little sense for participants to actively
inhibit T2 in this task, we attribute the outcome to more reactive
inhibition in bilinguals.

General Discussion
Numerous studies have shown that balanced bilinguals differ
from monolinguals in various cognitive tasks, and it has been
6
The error rates at T1 for the remaining participants averaged 35% in
the bilingual group (range 23%–52%) and 30% in the monolingual group
(range 17%– 45%).

310

COLZATO ET AL.

Figure 6. A: T1 (unconditional) performance as a function of the language group (bilinguals vs. monolinguals). B: T2 performance, given T1
correct as a function of the language group (bilinguals vs. monolinguals).
T1 ⫽ Target 1; T2 ⫽ Target 2.

suggested that greater inhibitory efficiency on the part of the
bilinguals may play a role in creating these differences. However,
the outcome patterns are not always systematic and replicable, and
the hypothetical inhibitory processes are not well specified. In an
attempt to clarify this picture, we aimed to distinguish between
active inhibition, which would reflect processes carried out with
the main purpose of excluding particular information from processing, and reactive inhibition, which may be a side effect of
facilitatory processes in a capacity-limited system.
Experiment 1 can be considered a direct test of active inhibition,
and, yet, the performance of bilinguals and monolinguals was
identical. This result undermines strong, general claims about
better developed processes subserving active inhibition in bilinguals. It should be emphasized that the stop signal task can be
viewed as assessing a broad range of the inhibitory processes but
is unlikely to cover all of them, a fact that implies we cannot rule

out a role for the inhibitory benefits of bilingualism in tasks other
than those tested here. Experiment 2 was also thought to index
inhibition, but the outcome was equivocal. On the one hand,
bilinguals differed systematically from monolinguals, and they did
so in a way that may be attributed to inhibitory processes. On the
other hand, the fact that their performance differed with respect to
not only the second, inhibitory phase of the impact of random
spatial cues but the first, facilitatory phase makes it difficult to
determine whether active or reactive inhibitory processes were
responsible. A clearer picture was provided by Experiment 3, in
which active inhibition was less likely to occur. Bilinguals had
significantly greater difficulties than monolinguals did in processing a temporally close second target while still processing the first.
Given that there was no indication that bilinguals have fewer
attentional resources than monolinguals do, this performance difference must have to do with the side effects of processing the first
target.
Apparently, bilinguals invest more of their resources in processing a target (Route a in Figure 1) and/or processing a target leads
to a stronger inhibition of competitors (Route b). Either way,
differences in the performance of bilinguals and monolinguals
seem to reflect side effects of selecting stimulus events for action
rather than differences in some general inhibitory mechanism. We
thus propose that the cognitive processing advantages that bilinguals enjoy are not due to the constant exercise in inhibiting, as
previous findings were taken to suggest. Rather, we propose that
learning to keep two or more languages separate leads to a general
improvement in selecting goal-relevant information from competing, goal-irrelevant information—a view that seems to converge
with more recent considerations of Bialystok and collaborators
(e.g., Bialystok et al., 2006).
This improvement may be achieved by the stronger maintenance
of goals in working memory, so they can provide more and
stronger support for goal-related cognitive representations. How
this maintenance may work has been studied by Byrne and Bovair
(1997), who used a cognitive simulation work on the role of goal
support in simple procedural tasks, and more recently by Egner
and Hirsch (2005), who used event-related functional magnetic
resonance imaging. The latter authors analyzed the brain processes
that are triggered by the detection of response conflict, which was
induced through Stroop-type stimuli. Rather than reducing the
activation of irrelevant stimulus representations (which would
indicate active inhibition), conflict detection led to the stronger
activation of relevant representations. Connectivity analyses revealed that this increase in activation was induced by signals from
dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC), which were assumed to
translate the action goal into top-down support for goal-related
processes (e.g., Desimone & Duncan, 1995; Miller & Cohen,
2001). Recent observations have linked DLPFC to bilingualism
(see Rodriguez-Fornells, de Diego Balaguer, & Münte, 2006, for a
recent review). For instance, the switch from one language to
another is accompanied by higher DLPFC activation (Hernandez,
Dapretto, Mazziotta, & Bookheimer, 2001), and stimulation of the
left DLPFC by means of TMS—a common treatment for depression—induces unexpected language switches (Holtzheimer,
Fawaz, Wilson, & Avery, 2005). Taken together, these findings
suggest that bilinguals outperform monolinguals by building up
and maintaining goal representations more efficiently and/or by

BILINGUALISM AND REACTIVE INHIBITION

translating these representations more efficiently into top-down
support of goal-relevant activities (see Route a in Figure 1).
Whether and to what degree bilinguals and monolinguals differ
with respect to reactive inhibition mechanisms (Route b in Figure
1), or at least with respect to the amount of reactive inhibition they
are commonly facing, is difficult to judge at this point. At first
sight, one may consider a selection mechanism based on top-down
support sufficient. However, many selection models are based on
a winner-takes-all principle, which implies a direct, negative relationship between the activation of target representations, on the
one hand, and distractor representations, on the other (for an
overview, see O’Reilly, 1998). Such a relationship presupposes
inhibitory links between target and distractor representations, just
as depicted in Figure 1. To the degree that these links really exist,
the assumption that bilinguals enjoy more top-down support of
target representations via Route a necessarily implies that bilinguals experience more reactive inhibition along Route b. However,
whether and to what degree this more pronounced reactive inhibition actually affects performance depends on the details of
cortical decision making (for an overview, see Bogacz, 2007).
According to so-called race models of decision making, alternative cognitive representations collect evidence in their favor
(i.e., are activated to the degree that the alternative representations
are consistent with the current stimulus) and trigger a response as
soon as their activation exceeds a particular threshold (e.g., Vickers, 1970). On such an account, stronger top-down support would
be sufficient to explain better performance in bilinguals, irrespective of whether reactive inhibition takes place. According to the
diffusion models, which are biologically more realistic (e.g., Ratcliff, 1978), a decision for one alternative is made only if its
activation exceeds the activation of all competitors to a particular
degree. Thus, it is difference in activation rather than absolute
activation that counts, and this difference is much more easily
created between codes that (reactively) inhibit each other. On such
an account, bilinguals would not necessarily require stronger inhibitory links but the hypothesized stronger top-down support they
enjoy would translate into greater reactive inhibition. We doubt
that sufficient empirical evidence is available to allow us to decide
between these theoretical alternatives at this point, and we share
Bialystok et al.’s (2006) view that more types of executive functions
may need to be considered. However, we do hope that distinguishing
between different types of inhibition and considering the interplay
between goal maintenance and reactive inhibition will provide interesting avenues for further research on bilingualism.

References
Akyürek, E. G., Riddell, P. M., Toffanin, P., & Hommel, B. (2007).
Adaptive control of event integration: Evidence from event-related potentials. Psychophysiology, 44, 383–391.
Bain, B. (1975). Toward an integration of Piaget and Vygotsky: Bilingual
considerations. Linguistics, 16, 5–20.
Band, G. P. H., van der Molen, M. W., & Logan, G. D. (2003). Horse-race
model simulations of the stop-signal procedure. Acta Psychologica, 112,
105–142.
Bialystok, E. (1988). Levels of bilingualism and levels of linguistic awareness. Developmental Psychology, 24, 560 –567.
Bialystok, E. (2001). Bilingualism in development: Language, literacy, and
cognition. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Bialystok, E. (2006). Effect of bilingualism and computer video game

311

experience on the Simon task. Canadian Journal of Experimental Psychology, 60, 68 –79.
Bialystok, E., Craik, F. I. M., Klein, R., & Viswanathan, M. (2004).
Bilingualism, aging, and cognitive control: Evidence from the Simon
task. Psychology and Aging, 19, 290 –303.
Bialystok, E., Craik, F. I. M., & Ruocco, A. C. (2006). Dual-modality
monitoring in a classification task: The effects of bilingualism and aging.
Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 59, 1968 –1983.
Bialystok, E., Craik, F. I. M., & Ryan, J. (2006). Executive control in a
modified anti-saccade task: Effects on aging and bilingualism. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 32,
1341–1354.
Bialystok, E., Martin, M. M., & Viswanathan, M. (2005). Bilingualism
across the lifespan: The rise and fall of inhibitory control. International
Journal of Bilingualism, 9, 103–119.
Bogacz, R. (2007). Optimal decision-making theories: Linking neurobiology with behavior. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 11, 118 –125.
Byrne, M. D., & Bovair, S. (1997). A working memory model of a
common procedural error. Cognitive Science, 21, 31– 61.
Colzato, L. S., Spapè, M., Pannebakker, M. M., & Hommel, B. (2007).
Working memory and the attentional blink: Blink size is predicted by
individual differences in operation span. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 14, 1051–1057.
Costa, A., Kovacic, D., Franck, J., & Caramazza, A. (2003). On the
autonomy of the grammatical gender systems of the two languages of a
bilingual. Bilingualism: Language and Cognition, 6, 181–200.
Desimone, R., & Duncan, J. (1995). Neural mechanisms of selective visual
attention. Annual Review of Neuroscience, 18, 193–222.
Dijkstra, T., & van Heuven, W. J. B. (1998). The BIA model and bilingual
word recognition. In J. Grainger and A. Jacobs (Eds.), Localist connectionist approaches to human cognition (pp. 189 –225). Hillsdale, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Di Lollo, V., Kawahara, J. I., Ghorashi, S. M., & Enns, J. T. (2005). The
attentional blink: Resource depletion or temporary loss of control?
Psychological Research, 69, 191–200.
Dufour, R., & Kroll, J. F. (1995). Matching words to concepts in two
languages: A test of the concept mediation model of bilingual representation. Memory & Cognition, 23, 166 –180.
Duncan, S. E., & De Avila, E. (1979). Bilingualism and cognition: Some
recent findings. NABE Journal, 4, 15–50.
Egner, T., & Hirsch, J. (2005). Cognitive control mechanisms resolve
conflict through cortical amplification of task-relevant information. Nature Neuroscience, 8, 1784 –1790.
Fuentes, L. J., Vivas, A. B., & Humphreys, G. W. (1999). Inhibitory
tagging of stimulus properties in inhibition of return: Effects on semantic
priming and flanker interference. Quarterly Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 52A, 149 –164.
Green, D. W. (1998). Mental control of the bilingual lexico-sematic system. Bilingualism: Language and Cognition, 1, 67– 81.
Gross, J., Schmitz, F., Schnitzler, I., Kessler, K., Shapiro, K., Hommel, B.,
& Schnitzler, A. (2004). Long-range neural synchrony predicts temporal
limitations of visual attention in humans. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, USA, 101, 13050 –13055.
Hernandez, A. E., Dapretto, M., Mazziotta, J., & Bookheimer, S. (2001).
Language switching and language representation in Spanish–English
bilinguals: An fMRI study. Neuroimage, 14, 510 –520.
Holtzheimer, P., Fawaz, W., Wilson, C., & Avery, D. (2005). Repetitive
transcranial magnetic stimulation may induce language switching in
bilingual patients. Brain and Language, 94, 274 –277.
Hommel, B. (2004). Event files: Feature binding in and across perception
and action. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 8, 494 –500.
Hommel, B., & Akyürek, E. G. (2005). Lag-1 sparing in the attentional
blink: Benefits and costs of integrating two events into a single episode.
Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 58A, 1415–1433.

312

COLZATO ET AL.

Hommel, B., Kessler, K., Schmitz, F., Gross, J., Akyürek, E., Shapiro, K.,
& Schnitzler, A. (2006). How the brain blinks: Towards a neurocognitive model of the attentional blink. Psychological Research, 70, 425–
435.
Ivanoff, J., & Taylor, T. L. (2006). Inhibition of return promotes stopsignal inhibition by delaying responses. Visual Cognition, 13, 503–512.
Kahneman, D., Treisman, A., & Gibbs, B. J. (1992). The reviewing of
object files: Object-specific integration of information. Cognitive Psychology, 24, 175–219.
Kessler, C., & Quinn, M. E. (1987). Language minority children’s linguistic and cognitive creativity. Journal of Multilingual and Multicultural
Development, 8, 173–186.
Klein, R. (2000). Inhibition of return: Who, what, when, where, how and
why. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 4, 138 –147.
Klein, R. M. (1988, August 4). Inhibitory tagging system facilitates visual
search. Nature, 334, 430 – 431.
Kroll, J. F., Michael, E., Tokowicz, N., & Dufour, R. (2002). The development of lexical influency in a second language. Second Language
Research, 18, 141–175.
Kroll, J. F., & Stewart, E. (1994). Category interference in translation and
picture naming: Evidence for asymmetric connections between bilingual
memory representations. Journal of Memory and Language, 33, 149 –
174.
La Heij, W. (2005). Lexical selection in monolinguals and bilinguals. In
J. F. Kroll and A. M. B. de Groot (Eds.), Handbook of bilingualism (pp.
289 –307). New York: Oxford University Press.
Levitt, H. J. (1971). Transformed up– down methods in psychoacoustics.
Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 49, 467– 477.
Logan, G. D. (1994). On the ability to inhibit thought and action: A user’s
guide to the stop signal paradigm. In D. Dagenbach & T. H. Carr (Eds.),
Inhibitory processes in attention, memory, and language (pp. 189 –239).
San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Logan, G. D., & Cowan, W. B. (1984). (1984). On the ability to inhibit
thought and action: A theory of an act of control. Psychological Review,
91, 295–327.
Lupiàñez, J., Milliken, B., Solano, C., Weaver, B., & Tipper, S. P. (2001).
On the strategic modulation of the time course of facilitation and
inhibition of return. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology,
54A, 753–773.
MacLeod, C. M., Dodd, M. D., Sheard, E. D., Wilson, D. E., & Bibi, U.
(2003). In opposition to inhibition. In B. H. Ross (Ed.), The psychology
of learning and motivation (Vol. 43, pp. 163–214). San Diego, CA:
Academic Press.
Miller, E. K., & Cohen, J. D. (2001). An integrative theory of prefrontal
cortex function. Annual Review of Neuroscience, 24, 167–202.
O’Reilly, R. C. (1998). Six principles for biologically-based computational
models of cortical cognition. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 2, 455– 462.
Olivers, C. N. L., & Nieuwenhuis, S. T. (2005). The beneficial effect of
concurrent task-irrelevant mental activity on temporal attention. Psychological Science, 16, 265–269.
Posner, M. I. (1980). Orienting of attention. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 32, 3–25.

Posner, M. I., & Cohen, Y. (1984). Components of visual orienting. In H.
Bouma & D. G. Bouwhuis (Eds.), Attention and performance: Control
of language processes (pp. 531–556). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Potter, M. C., Staub, A., & O’Connor, D. H. (2002). The time course of
competition for attention: Attention is initially labile. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 28, 1149 –
1162.
Poulisse, N., & Bongaerts, T. (1994). First language use in second language production. Applied Linguistics, 15, 36 –57.
Ratcliff, R. (1978). A theory of memory retrieval. Psychological Review,
83, 59 –108.
Raymond, J. E., Shapiro, K. L., & Arnell, K. M. (1992). Temporary
suppression of visual processing in an RSVP task: An attentional blink?
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 18, 849 – 860.
Rodriguez-Fornells, A., de Diego Balaguer, R., & Münte, T. F. (2006).
Executive functions in bilingual language processing. Language Learning, 133–190.
Shapiro, K. (2001). The limits of attention: Temporal constraints in human
information processing. Oxford, England: Oxford University Press.
Shapiro, K., Schmitz, F., Martens, S., Hommel, B., & Schnitzler, A.
(2006). Resource sharing in the attentional blink. NeuroReport, 17,
163–166.
Suls, J., & Wheeler, L. (2007). Psychological magnetism: A brief history
of assimilation and contrast in psychology. In D. A. Stapel & J. Suls
(Eds.), Assimilation and contrast in social psychology (pp. 9 – 44). New
York: Psychology Press.
Taylor, D. I., & Klein, R. M. (2000). Visual and motor effects in inhibition
of return. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance, 26, 1639 –1655.
Taylor, T. L., & Ivanoff, J. (2003). The interplay of stop signal inhibition
and inhibition of return. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology,
56A, 1349 –1371.
Van den Wildenberg, W. P. M., van Boxtel, G. J. M., van der Molen,
M. W., Bosch, D. A., Speelman, J. D., & Brunia, C. H. M. (2006).
Stimulation of the subthalamic region facilitates the selection and inhibition of motor responses in Parkinson’s disease. Journal of Cognitive
Neuroscience, 18, 626 – 636.
Van Heuven, W. J. B., Dijkstra, A., & Grainger, J. (1998). Orthographic
neighborhood effects in bilingual word recognition. Journal of Memory
and Language, 39, 458 – 483.
Vickers, D. (1970). Evidence for an accumulator model of psychophysical
discrimination. Ergonomics, 13, 37–58.
Visser, T. A. W., Bischof, W. F., & Di Lollo, V. (1999). Attentional
switching in spatial and non-spatial domains: Evidence from the attentional blink. Psychological Bulletin, 125, 458 – 469.

Received October 9, 2006
Revision received October 2, 2007
Accepted October 2, 2007 䡲

