Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition
2008, Vol. 34, No. 2, 343–352

Copyright 2008 by the American Psychological Association
0278-7393/08/$12.00 DOI: 10.1037/0278-7393.34.2.343

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Priming Addition Facts With Semantic Relations
Miriam Bassok and Samuel F. Pedigo

An T. Oskarsson

University of Washington

University of Colorado at Boulder

Results from 2 relational-priming experiments suggest the existence of an automatic analogical coordination between semantic and arithmetic relations. Word pairs denoting object sets served as primes in a
task that elicits “obligatory” activation of addition facts (5 ⫹ 3 activates 8; J. LeFevre, J. Bisanz, & L.
Mrkonjic, 1988). Semantic relations between the priming words were either aligned or misaligned with
the structure of addition (M. Bassok, V. M. Chase, & S. A. Martin, 1998). Obligatory activation of
addition facts occurred when the digits were primed by categorically related words (tulips– daisies),
which are aligned with addition, but did not occur when the digits were primed by unrelated words
(hens–radios, Experiment 1) or by functionally related words (records–songs, Experiment 2), which are
misaligned with addition. These findings lend support to the viability of automatic analogical priming
(B. A. Spellman, K. J. Holyoak, & R. G. Morrison, 2001) and highlight the relevance of arithmetic
applications to theoretical accounts of mental arithmetic.
Keywords: analogy, relational priming, cognitive arithmetic, mathematical reasoning, conceptual integration

(Ashcraft, 1992; Campbell, 1995). Just as words spread activation
to semantically related concepts (e.g., nurse primes doctor; Meyer
& Schvaneveldt, 1971), so do digits spread activation to arithmetically related facts (e.g., 5 ⫹ 3 activates 8; LeFevre, Bisanz, &
Mrkonjic, 1988).
There are many good conceptual and pragmatic reasons for
investigating the unique aspects of arithmetic knowledge and skill.
However, this line of research has not taken account of the fact
that, by and large, people use arithmetic knowledge in the context
of solving real-life problems. In the applied context, people coordinate their knowledge of arithmetic operations with their knowledge about the entities in the target situations (e.g., 4 girls ⫹ 2
boys ⫽ 6 children; 12 cookies/6 children ⫽ 2 cookies per child).
As we elaborate later, prior work of Bassok, Chase, and Martin
(1998) suggests that this coordination involves analogical alignment of semantic and arithmetic relations, or semantic alignment.
In the above example, the categorical relation between girls and
boys is aligned with addition, and the functional relation between
cookies and children is aligned with division.
Bassok and her colleagues found that people adhere to semantic
alignments when they reason about mathematical word problems
(for a review, see Bassok, 2001). In the next section, we present
some illustrative examples from this prior work. Then, we report
results from two relational priming experiments in which pairs of
word primes that were semantically aligned and misaligned with
addition modulated automatic activation of addition facts. In the
General Discussion section, we suggest that the semantic and the
arithmetic memory networks do not just share analogous representations of interrelated concepts but are actually coordinated
with each other via analogous semantic and arithmetic relations.

Arithmetic competence is considered to be a highly specialized
subarea of human cognition. An impressive body of work has
examined the origins and the development of arithmetic competence, the computational strategies used by children and adults,
and the way people represent numbers and arithmetic facts (for an
edited volume of review chapters, see Campbell, 2005). Most
theoretical accounts of arithmetic competence hold that adults
retrieve well-practiced arithmetic facts from long-term memory
(e.g., Ashcraft & Battaglia, 1978; Campbell, 1987; Dehaene &
Cohen, 1995; Geary & Widaman, 1987; McCloskey, 1992;
Siegler, 1987). These accounts assume that arithmetic facts are
retrieved from a specialized memory network of interrelated number concepts, which is analogous to the semantic memory network

Editor’s Note. Richard Carlson served as the action editor for this article.—RCM

Miriam Bassok and Samuel F. Pedigo, Department of Psychology,
University of Washington; An Oskarsson, Department of Psychology,
University of Colorado at Boulder.
The experiments reported here formed the basis of Samuel F. Pedigo’s
master’s thesis and were, in turn, based on results from An Oskarsson’s
master’s thesis. Both sets of studies were conducted at the University of
Washington under the supervision of Miriam Bassok. The studies were
presented, respectively, at the 44th and 40th annual meetings of the
Psychonomic Society, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada Los Angeles,
CA, November 2003 and November 1999, respectively. We thank Airom
Bleicher and John Miyamoto for their help with data analyses, John Jonides
and John Palmer for referring us to the relevant attention literature, Amy
Guthormsen for her insightful feedback, and Boaz Keysar for coming up
with the original idea that motivated this work. Special thanks are extended
to Keith Holyoak for his invaluable support throughout this project.
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Miriam
Bassok, Department of Psychology, University of Washington, P. O. Box
351525, Seattle, WA 98195. E-mail: mbassok@u.washington.edu

Semantic Alignments in Mathematical Word Problems
People have extensive experience with mathematical applications, whether they are solving problems in their everyday life
(e.g., Carraher & Schliemann, 2000; Saxe, 1988) or solving math343

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

344

BASSOK, PEDIGO, AND OSKARSSON

ematical word problems in school (e.g., Nesher, 1989). In both
contexts, people use their mathematical knowledge to model quantitative relations between various entities and, therefore, have to
draw on their world knowledge to constrain problem formulation,
solution, and verification (e.g., English & Halford, 1995; Greeno,
1987; Hegarty, Mayer, & Monk, 1995; Hinsley, Hayes, & Simon,
1977; Kintsch, 1988; Koedinger & Nathan, 2004). In doing so,
people’s world knowledge sometimes conflicts with the formal
properties of mathematics, leading to systematic errors (e.g., Bassok, Wu, & Olseth, 1995). However, the very existence of such
errors demonstrates people’s strong tendency to coordinate their
mathematical knowledge with the rest of their conceptual knowledge (e.g., De Corte & Verschaffel, 1996; Fischbein, Deri, Nello,
& Marino, 1985).
Bassok and her colleagues found that people coordinate their
semantic and arithmetic knowledge by aligning semantic relations
between the objects that appear in word problems with analogous
mathematical relations (for a review, see Bassok, 2001).1 The
work that is most directly relevant to the studies reported here
pertains to semantic alignments for the arithmetic operations of
addition and division (Bassok et al., 1998). According to Bassok et
al. (1998), people align categorical semantic relations with the
operation of addition because categorically related objects play
identical roles with respect to their joint superset (e.g., both tulips
and daisies are flowers), just as the addends play identical (commutative) roles with respect to their sum (a ⫹ b ⫽ b ⫹ a ⫽ c). In
a complementary way, people align functionally asymmetric object relations, such as “contain” (e.g., flowers are contained in
vases rather than vice versa), with the noncommutative relation
between the dividend and the divisor (a/b ⫽ b/a).
Bassok et al. (1998) found that college students, who have
extensive experience with the application of arithmetic operations,
adhere to semantic alignments when they construct arithmetic
word problems. In one experimental condition, participants received word pairs denoting object sets and were asked to construct
simple addition word problems involving these sets. When presented with categorically related sets (e.g., plums and peaches),
which are aligned with addition, participants mainly constructed
problems in which the sets were directly added to each other (e.g.,
5 plums ⫹ 4 peaches ⫽ 9 pieces of fruit). However, when they
were presented with functionally related sets (e.g., plums and
baskets), which are misaligned with addition, participants refrained from constructing such direct-addition problems. Instead,
they used a variety of “semantic escape” strategies, such as inventing a third object set (e.g., pears) and constructing more
complex word problems that preserved semantic alignment (e.g.,
[5 plums ⫹ 3 pears]/2 baskets ⫽ 4 pieces of fruit per basket). The
complementary pattern was obtained when the task was to construct division rather than addition problems, whereby participants
constructed more direct-division problems for functionally related
than for categorically related sets.
A similar pattern of semantic alignments was found when college students solved unfamiliar permutation word problems (Bassok et al., 1995), and when middle school, high school, and college
students solved division word problems (Martin & Bassok, 2005).
Such effects are consistent with people’s extensive experience
with problems involving arithmetic applications. Although we do
not have empirical data about the frequency of semantic alignments in every-day problems, Bassok et al. (1998) provided such

data for a large corpus of textbook word problems. They found
that, in all cases, the arguments of addition were categorically
related objects (e.g., red and blue marbles; toads and frogs). At the
same time, in 96% of the cases, the arguments of division were
objects related by functionally asymmetric relations (e.g., marbles
and boxes; frogs and ponds).

Overview of the Present Experiments
People’s extensive experience with semantically aligned applications of arithmetic operations, and the robustness of semantic
alignments in people’s reasoning about word problems, strongly
suggest that such alignments are highly automatic. The present
study was designed to examine this possibility for the most basic
and most practiced arithmetic operation of addition. To this end,
we conducted two experiments in which we examined whether
pairs of word primes, which are either semantically aligned (e.g.,
tulips– daisies) or semantically misaligned with addition (e.g.,
birds– cages), can modulate automatic activation of addition facts
(e.g., 3 ⫹ 4 ⫽ 7).2
For our experiments, we adapted the number-matching task that
LeFevre and colleagues used to demonstrate that pairs of digits
lead to “obligatory” (unintentional) activation of simple addition
facts (LeFevre et al., 1988; LeFevre & Kulak, 1994). In one
version of their number-matching task, people see a pair of cue
digits that are related by the plus sign (e.g., “5 ⫹ 3”). They then
see a single digit target and have to decide whether the target
matched one of the cue digits. When rejecting nonmatching targets
(i.e., when the correct answer is “no”), people take longer to reject
“sum” targets (in this case, an “8”) than to reject nonsum or
“neutral” targets (e.g., “9”). Henceforth, we refer to this pattern of
results as the sum effect.
We preceded the pairs of cue digits with pairs of priming words
that were either semantically aligned or semantically misaligned
with addition. The aligned primes denoted categorically related
sets (e.g., tulips– daisies). The misaligned primes denoted unrelated sets (e.g., hens–radios) in Experiment 1 and denoted functionally related sets (e.g., birds– cages) in Experiment 2. Because
categorical primes provide an appropriate relational context for the
application of addition, they should support automatic activation of
addition facts and lead to the typical sum effect. The unrelated and
functionally related primes, by contrast, provide an inappropriate
relational context for the application of addition. We therefore
reasoned that these primes should reduce or block automatic
activation of addition facts and, therefore, diminish or eliminate
the typical sum effect.
On the basis of the above logic, we predicted that the sum effect
would be more pronounced in the semantically aligned than in the
semantically misaligned priming condition. That is, we predicted
1

For a review of a different but related line of work on analogical
coordination of semantic and arithmetic knowledge, see Dixon (2005).
2
As we explain below, our experimental manipulation builds upon prior
work in cognitive arithmetic that has established automatic activation of
addition facts. At present, there is no evidence that documents similar
effects for division. We therefore restricted our initial investigation to the
operation of addition. In light of our findings, it seems worthwhile to
extend the present investigation to the operation of division. We return to
this point in the General Discussion section.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

SEMANTIC PRIMING OF ADDITION FACTS

that the difference between response latencies to sum and neutral
targets (e.g., between 8 and 9, respectively, for cue digits 5 ⫹ 3)
would be larger when the cue digits are primed with categorical
primes (tulips– daisies) than when they are primed with unrelated
primes (hens–radios) or with functionally related primes (birds–
cages).
It is important to note that the logic of our experimental design
presupposes the viability of relational priming. Spellman, Holyoak, and Morrison (2001) found that, under an appropriate
strategic set, semantic relations prime analogous semantic relations. In the General Discussion section, we compare the present
findings with those of Spellman et al. We propose that the process
that mediates the coordination between the semantic and the arithmetic memory networks is similar to the process that mediates
analogical access (Forbus, Gentner, & Law, 1995; Hummel &
Holyoak, 1997).

Experiment 1
In Experiment 1, we compared the magnitude of the sum effect
for cue digits (e.g., 3 ⫹ 4) that were primed by aligned categorically related word pairs (e.g., ants–beetles) and by misaligned
unrelated word pairs (e.g., hens–radios). According to Bassok et
al. (1998), unlike categorically related sets that preserve a one-toone mapping with the structure of addition (e.g., 4 ants ⫹ 3
beetles ⫽ 7 insects), semantically unrelated sets are misaligned
with addition. This misalignment arises because one would need to
traverse many links in the semantic network to find the superset
that corresponds to their sum (e.g., 4 hens ⫹ 3 radios ⫽ 7 things).
Such intermediate links (e.g., hens are farm birds, which are
animate creatures, which are things) introduce relational mismatches with the operation of addition, in which the addends are
directly related to their sum.

Method
Participants
One hundred fifty-four University of Washington introductory
psychology students, 91 women and 63 men, participated for
course extra credit. All were native English speakers with normal
or corrected vision.

Materials
The trial stimuli were random combinations of 80 word triplets
and 48 digit triplets. Each trial consisted of a priming word pair
(e.g., tulips– daisies) with its word target (e.g., tulips) and a pair of
cue digits (e.g., 2 ⫹ 3) with its digit target (e.g., 5). Below, we first
describe the word and the digit triplets and then explain how the
word and the digit triplets were combined.
Word triplets. All word stimuli were plural nouns that could
serve as referents of object sets (e.g., birds, coats, thieves, stories).
We first selected a set of candidate singular nouns from wordnorms databases (Battig & Montague, 1969; Coltheart, 1981). The
candidate words were in the upper 10% of word frequency, familiarity, and concreteness. Their syllable count was restricted to be
between one and five. From this candidate word set, we constructed 80 word triplets in which the nouns were transformed
from singulars to plurals (e.g., from stain to stains ). Half of the

345

triplets consisted of categorically related nouns, which we refer to
as aligned-categorical, or AC, triplets (e.g., oaks, elms, and maples).3 The other half consisted of unrelated nouns, which we refer
to as misaligned-unrelated, or MU, triplets (e.g., marbles, guards,
and ponds). The two sets of AC and MU triplets were matched for
word frequency, familiarity, concreteness, and syllable count. The
AC and MU word triplets appear, respectively, in Table 1 and
Table 2.
In each word triplet, two words were designated to serve as the
priming word pair and the third as the target. In order to balance
the number of “yes” and “no” responses, half of the target words
matched one of the priming words (correct response is “yes”) and
the other half did not (correct response is “no”). Specifically, of the
40 AC triplets, 20 had a matching target (e.g., horses, donkeys, and
horses) and 20 a nonmatching AC target (e.g., ants, beetles, and
spiders). Similarly, of the 40 MU triplets, 20 had a matching target
(e.g., gowns, bridges, and bridges) and 20 a nonmatching MU
target (e.g., napkins, cats, and authors). Half of the matching
targets matched the left, and the other half matched the right words
of the priming pairs.
Relatedness ratings for all the priming word pairs used in
Experiment 1 were obtained from a subset of participants (n ⫽ 33)
after they had completed all the experimental trials of the worddigit matching task. These participants rated the extent to which
the priming word pairs were related to each other on a 7-point
Likert scale, with 1 indicating that the words were completely
unrelated and 7 indicating that the words were highly related. Each
participant provided ratings to 60 word pairs that were selected at
random from the 80 priming pairs used in the experiment. AC pairs
(M ⫽ 5.97, SD ⫽ 0.73) received significantly higher relatedness
ratings than the MU pairs (M ⫽1.42, SD ⫽ 0.42), t(32) ⫽ 37.60,
p ⬍ .001.
Digit triplets. Forty-eight digit triplets were adapted from the
“standard” stimuli cues used by Lefevre and Kulak (1994). Each
digit triplet consisted of a pair of cue digits and a digit target. The
cue digits (m ⫹ n) were of the form m ⬎ 1, n ⬎ 1, and m ⫽ n (e.g.,
3 ⫹ 2). Half of the digit targets matched one of the cue digits and
half did not. Half of the matching targets matched the left and half
matched the right cue digit. The complete set of digit stimuli used
in Experiment 1 appears in Table 3.
Half of the triplets had matching targets (correct response
“yes”), and the other half had targets that did not match either one
of the cue digits (correct response “no”). Only triplets with nonmatching digit targets are relevant for assessing the sum effect (24
triplets total). The cue digits of these triplets appear in the leftmost
column of Table 3. The target digits ranged from 5 to 9 and,
depending on the cue digits, served as either sum or neutral targets.
Twelve triplets consisted of the cue digits and their sum target
3
The decision that certain priming pairs are categorically related was
based solely on the authors’ judgment. After the studies were completed,
we realized that some of the AC word pairs had a set–subset relation (e.g.,
a kayak is a kind of a canoe). We therefore asked participants from a
similar population to rate the degree to which the AC word pairs were
categorically related. As we describe in the Method section of Experiment
2, these ratings were consistent with our original classification. More
important, the set–subset pairs received categorical ratings similar to those
of the purely categorical pairs.

BASSOK, PEDIGO, AND OSKARSSON

346
Table 1
Aligned Categorically Related Word Triplets

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Matching target

Table 3
Digit Triplets

Nonmatching target

Nonmatching target

Priming pair

Target

Priming pair

Target

stools-chairs
robins-sparrows
bees-wasps
boots-sandals
canoes-kayaks
circles-squares
clams-oysters
crabs-lobsters
doctors-lawyers
geese-ducks
hamsters-gerbils
hawks-eagles
horses-donkeys
jars-cans
lunches-dinners
plums-peaches
saws-hammers
shovels-rakes
tigers-cheetahs
trumpets-trombones

chairs
robins
bees
sandals
canoes
squares
clams
lobsters
doctors
ducks
hamsters
eagles
horses
cans
lunches
peaches
hammers
shovels
tigers
trombones

ants–beetles
bins-boxes
blankets-quilts
books-magazines
bushes-shrubs
crooks-thieves
emeralds-rubies
frogs-toads
gems-jewels
gorillas-monkeys
limes-lemons
oaks-elms
priests-pastors
rifles-guns
spoons-forks
stories-tales
streets-avenues
trucks-vans
tulips-daisies
universities-colleges

spiders
cases
comforters
newspapers
hedges
robbers
diamonds
turtles
stones
apes
oranges
maples
ministers
revolvers
knives
myths
roads
cars
roses
schools

(e.g., 5, for the cue digits 3 ⫹ 2), and 12 consisted of the cue digits
and a neutral target (e.g., 7).
In the other 24 triplets, the targets matched one of the cue digits
(correct answer is “yes”). Half of the matching target triplets
served as cue controls. In these 12 triplets, the cue digits were the
same as those used in the nonmatching sum and neutral triplets
(e.g., 3 ⫹ 2; see the leftmost column of Table 3) and were in the
2– 6 digit range. The other half of the matching target triplets
served as target controls. These 12 triplets were constructed to
ensure that the matching targets (“yes” response) covered the same
Table 2
Misaligned Unrelated Word Triplets
Matching target

Nonmatching target

Priming pair

Target

Priming pair

Target

bays-tests
camps-throats
clowns-ovens
drums-crystals
floods-cards
furs-tanks
gowns-bridges
hens-radios
judges-sponges
leaves-waists
lungs-statues
members-lanterns
mugs-limousines
parades-moles
pockets-trees
poisons-jackets
posters-harvests
puzzles-necks
rivers-tables
vases-hairs

tests
camps
ovens
drums
cards
furs
bridges
hens
sponges
leaves
statues
members
limousines
parades
trees
poisons
harvests
puzzles
tables
vases

alligators–fountains
articles–wounds
barns–toes
bears–thumbs
buttons–parks
cloths–pictures
coats–biscuits
cousins–coffees
letters–irons
marbles-guards
napkins–cats
officers-frames
permits-stains
puppies-crosses
soups-tickets
teeth-garments
tools-bouquets
tractors-messages
trays-bands
whips-journals

hospitals
bells
rocks
races
incomes
footsteps
islands
tunnels
highways
ponds
authors
cattle
valleys
fans
nations
seas
beaches
fairies
deer
railroads

Cue digits
2⫹3
2⫹6
3⫹2
3⫹4
3⫹5
4⫹2
4⫹3
5⫹2
5⫹4
6⫹2
6⫹3
7⫹2

Matching target

Sum

Neutral

Cue

Target

Cue digits

5
8
5
7
8
6
7
7
9
8
9
9

8
5
7
9
6
9
9
9
7
5
7
6

2
6
3
3
3
4
3
2
4
2
6
2

5
8
5
7
8
6
7
7
9
8
9
9

7⫹5
8⫹5
5⫹8
7⫹6
5⫹8
8⫹6
7⫹9
9⫹7
4⫹9
8⫹4
6⫹9
9⫹2

Note. Cue digits in the leftmost column were used for sum, neutral, and
cue-control matching targets. Cue digits in the rightmost column were used
for target-control matching targets.

digit range (5–9) as the nonmatching targets (“no” response).
Accordingly, the cue digits in the target control triplets (e.g., 8 ⫹
4; see the rightmost column of Table 3) had sums larger than 10.
Apparatus. Written instructions and the experimental trials
were presented on 17-in. (43-cm) monitors controlled by PC
computers. Responses to digit and word targets (yes and no) and
response latencies were recorded with the use of Inquisit software
Version 1.31 software (Inquisit, 2000), which is accurate to 0.08
ms. All stimuli presentation times were multiples of the screen
refresh rate of 16.7 ms.

Procedure
In order to ensure that people attend to both the priming words
and the cue digits, on each experimental trial, participants had to
make two matching decisions (“Did you see X? yes/no”): one to a
word target (e.g., X ⫽ ants; X ⫽ spiders) and one to a digit target
(e.g., X ⫽ 3; X ⫽ 9). To discourage dual-tasking strategies, on half
of the trials, the digit target appeared first and was followed by the
word target, and on the other half, the word target appeared first.
Although participants responded to both word and digit targets,
only trials in which the digit targets appeared first (i.e., immediately after the cue digits) preserved the structure of the original
number-matching task (LeFevre et al., 1988). These trials provide
the cleanest test of whether semantically aligned or misaligned
word pairs would prime the sum effect. Hence, we only report the
results pertaining to the latencies and error rates of the relevant
digit targets in the digit-first condition, comparing the trials in
which these digits were primed by the semantically aligned and the
semantically misaligned word pairs.
Participants were tested in small groups of 4 –13. They received
verbal and written instructions explaining that they would see pairs
of words and digits and, subsequently, see word and digit probes.
Their task was to respond “yes” if the probe was one of the items
that were just presented and “no” if it was not. Participants were
instructed to place the index finger of their preferred hand on the
2 key on the numerical keypad of the keyboard. They had to
indicate their “yes” and “no” responses by pressing the 1 and 3 (or

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

SEMANTIC PRIMING OF ADDITION FACTS

3 and 1) keys, respectively, and then return their index finger to the
centered 2 key. They were instructed to respond as quickly as
possible without sacrificing accuracy. Participants were also told
that they would be taking a memory recognition test at the end of
the word-digit matching task to test their memory for the words
seen during the experiment. This instruction was intended to
encourage semantic processing of the words (Schreuder, Giovanni,
& Glazenborg, 1984), but we did not administer the memory test.
Figure 1 depicts the sequence of events on each experimental
trial. Each trial began with an asterisk prompt in the middle of the
screen. The prompt remained on the screen until the participant
pressed the 2 key on the numeric keypad of the keyboard. At this
keypress, a randomly selected pair of priming words appeared on
the screen. The words were presented in line-drawn boxes, one box
on the left and the other on the right side of the screen’s center.
After 480 ms of this words display, a pair of randomly selected cue
digits appeared in the boxes above the words, and a plus sign
appeared between the two boxes. The priming words and the cue
digits remained on the screen for an additional 135 ms, at which
point the stimuli were erased and masked for 16.7 ms. The computer then randomly selected either a digit or a word target and
displayed it at the center of the screen. This target remained on the
screen until the participant responded, or for a maximum of 2 s.
Participants pressed the designated yes or no keys to indicate
whether the target digit or word was presented in that trial. They
received written feedback, either “RIGHT” in green letters or
“WRONG” in red letters, which remained on the screen for 500
ms. Lack of response within 2 s also received the feedback
“WRONG.” After the feedback to the first target disappeared, the
second target was presented at the center of the screen. In the
digit-first condition, the second target was a word; in the word-first
condition, the second target was a digit. Participants responded to
the second target in the same manner they responded to the first.
Consecutive trials were separated by a forced 2-s delay.
Each participant received a unique randomized sequence of 160
trials that had a balanced 4 (word triplet) ⫻ 4 (digit triplet) ⫻2

until press ‘go’

347

(target order) factorial design, with five trials in each experimental
cell. The four word-triplet conditions were AC prime/matching
target, AC prime/nonmatching target, MU prime/matching target,
and MU prime/nonmatching target. The four digit-triplet conditions were sum, neutral, cue control, and target control. The two
target-order conditions were digit first and word first. The word
triplets were selected at random without replacement until all 80
triplets were exhausted and then sampled again for a total of 160
trials. The digit triplets were selected at random without replacement until all 48 triplets were exhausted, and this sampling was
repeated for a total of 160 trials. The constraints on the random
draw of the word and digit combinations were such that there were
no more than two consecutive identical trial types and no more
than four identical consecutive correct responses (e.g., “no”).
Participants received 20 practice trials that were similar to the
experimental trials. Although we wanted participants to get familiar with the matching task, we did not want them to think about the
relation between the words and the digits. Accordingly, all the
word triplets in the practice trials were unrelated (e.g., notes,
cords, and tubes). These word triplets were not used in the subsequent experimental trials. The practice trials were followed by a
brief clarification break during which the experimenter verified
that the participants understood the task. The participants then
proceeded to perform the 160 experimental trials. They took approximately 12 min to complete this task.

Results
As we have mentioned earlier, the data relevant for testing the
hypothesis that semantic alignments modulate obligatory activation of addition facts is restricted to the 40 experimental trials in
which the nonmatching sum (n ⫽ 20) and neutral (n ⫽ 20) digit
targets appeared first. Half of these trials were preceded by aligned
categorically related primes (AC), and half were preceded by
misaligned unrelated primes (MU), with 10 possible observations
per cell. Mean latencies of correct responses and mean error rates
were analyzed in separate 2 (priming words: AC, MU) ⫻ 2 (digit
target: sum, neutral) within-subjects repeated measures analyses of
variance (ANOVAs).

*
480 ms

Latencies

tulips + daisies

135 ms
3
tulips

5

+ daisies
until response

3
500 ms

(if “yes”)
RIGHT

until response
ROSES

(if “yes”)

500 ms

WRONG

Figure 1. An illustration of the experimental procedure. Asterisk represents the prompt used at the outset of each trial.

Data from 1 participant who failed to respond correctly on any
trials in multiple conditions were excluded. All analyses were
performed on data from the remaining 153 participants. The mean
latencies and standard errors for sum and neutral digit targets in the
AC and the MU conditions appear in the upper part of Table 4.
Latencies were computed on correct responses to sum and neutral
targets, excluding responses of trials in which participants responded incorrectly to the subsequently presented word targets
(thus ensuring that the digit latencies pertained only to trials in
which we had evidence that the participants processed the relevant
priming words). The mean number of responses per cell that met
these correctness criteria was 7.2 (SD ⫽ 1.8). Geometric means
were computed because they are less susceptible to outliers (Alf &
Grossberg, 1979; cf. Lu, Morrison, Hummel, & Holyoak, 2006);
arithmetic means yield the same rank order of conditions.
As in previous studies documenting obligatory activation of
addition facts (e.g., LeFevre et al., 1988), participants took signif-

BASSOK, PEDIGO, AND OSKARSSON

348

Table 4
Geometric Mean Latencies and Mean Errors Rates for Sum and
Neutral Targets in the Aligned-Categorical (AC) and
Misaligned-Unrelated (MU) Priming Conditions of Experiment 1
(N ⫽ 153)
AC primes

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Response
Latency
M
SEM
% Error
M
SEM

MU primes

Sum

Neutral

Sum

Neutral

923
15

861
13

896
13

895
13

30
2

27
2

27
2

28
2

icantly longer to reject the sum (909 ms) than the neutral digit
targets (878 ms), F(1, 152) ⫽ 20.93, MSE ⫽ 7,173, p ⬍ .001.
More important, there was a highly significant Priming Words ⫻
Digit Target interaction that was consistent with our semantic
alignment hypothesis, F(1, 152) ⫽ 23.176, MSE ⫽ 6,101, p ⬍
.001. Planned comparisons revealed that in the AC condition,
participants took 62 ms longer to reject sum over neutral targets,
t(152) ⫽ 5.79, p ⬍ .001. By contrast, in the MU condition, there
was no difference in the time it took participants to reject sum
versus neutral targets (M ⫽ 1 ms, t ⬍ 1). Thus, as predicted by the
semantic alignment hypothesis, the sum effect occurred in the AC
but did not occur in the MU condition.
No significant overall difference was found between MU (896
ms) and AC priming conditions (892 ms), F(1, 152) ⫽ 0.32,
MSE ⫽ 6,327, p ⫽ .575. Yet, as can be seen in Table 4, the
latencies of the sum and the neutral targets in the MU condition
(896 ms and 895 ms, respectively) fell between the values of the
sum and the neutral latencies in the AC condition (923 ms and 861
ms, respectively). Planned comparisons revealed that sum latencies were significantly longer in the AC than in the MU condition
(27 ms), t(152) ⫽ 2.76, p ⬍ .007, whereas neutral latencies were
significantly shorter in the AC condition than in the MU condition
(34 ms), t(152) ⫽ 4.13, p ⬍ .001. This pattern of results seems to
suggest that, relative to the MU condition, the sum effect observed
in the AC condition was due to both an enhanced activation of sum
targets and a suppressed activation of neutral (non-sum) targets.4

Errors
The mean error rates and their standard errors for the sum and
the neutral digits in the AC and the MU priming conditions appear
in Table 4. Responses were coded as errors if participants gave
“yes” responses to the nonmatching sum or neutral digit targets
and, irrespective of the correctness of their digit response, if they
responded incorrectly to the subsequently presented word targets.5
The error pattern across conditions was consistent with the pattern
of latencies, indicating that the latency differences cannot be
attributed to a speed–accuracy trade-off.
An interaction between priming words and digit targets approached significance, F(1, 152) ⫽ 3.33, MSE ⫽ 170, p ⫽ .070,
and was analogous to the interaction obtained for the latency data.
Planned comparisons revealed that, in the AC condition, the error
rate was significantly higher for sum than for neutral targets

(difference of 3%), t(152) ⫽ 2.56, p ⫽ .011. In contrast, there was
no reliable difference in error rates in the MU condition (t ⬍ 1).
There was no overall difference between error rates in the MU
(27%) than the AC priming condition (28%; (F ⬍ 1). Yet, for sum
targets, the error rate was marginally higher in the AC than in the
MU priming condition, t(152) ⫽ 1.87, p ⫽ .063, but there was
virtually no difference between the priming conditions in the
corresponding error rates of neutral targets ( p ⫽ .507).

Discussion
The latency and the error results of Experiment 1 showed that,
as we predicted, a priming context of semantically aligned and
misaligned object relations modulates automatic activation of addition facts. Categorically related word primes, which are aligned
with addition, led to a significant sum effect. At the same time,
semantically unrelated word primes, which are misaligned with
addition, did not elicit the sum effect.
As we have explained earlier, the categorical primes provide an
appropriate and highly practiced relational context for performing
the addition operation. The highly significant sum effect obtained
in the AC condition suggests that this context supported automatic
activation of addition facts (LeFevre et al., 1988). The lack of sum
effects in the MU condition is consistent with our entering conjecture that unrelated primes provide a semantic context that is
incongruent with performing the addition operation and, therefore,
block automatic activation of addition facts.6
Despite the consistency of the present results with our entering
semantic alignment hypothesis, it is possible that the difference in
the relative impact of AC and MU primes on the activation of
addition facts was mediated by factors other than the alignment of
semantic and arithmetic relations. In particular, because the words
in the AC primes were highly related to each other, whereas the
words in the MU primes were not, it is possible that differences in
the activation of addition facts in the two priming conditions were
somehow modulated by the degree of relatedness between the
4
In research on semantic priming, such a pattern of response latencies to
targets (sum) and their alternatives (here neutral) is explained in terms of
“center-surround inhibition,” whereby it is assumed that suppression of the
alternatives assists in retrieval of the relevant targets (e.g., Dagenbach,
Carr, & Barnhardt, 1990; Herd, Banich, & O’Reilly, 2006; but see Kahan,
2000, for a different interpretation of such latency patterns). Note, however, that it is impossible to determine whether the present pattern of results
reflects center-surround inhibition. This is because, in the present paradigm, there is no baseline level of activation to which one could compare
the sum and neutral latencies (Jonides & Mack, 1984).
5
The error rates in our word– digit coordination experiments were quite
high (25%–30%, see Tables 4 and 6). A significant proportion of these
errors (about 30%) were responses to word targets that followed the digit
targets. Even so, these error rates were much higher than those obtained in
prior digits-only studies (e.g., 3%–5% for similar digits in LeFevre &
Kulak, 1994). These high error rates attest to the relative difficulty of the
coordination task, which required attention to both digits and words.
6
We use the terms support and block quite loosely, as the present study
cannot illuminate the mechanism by which the semantic context modulates
the spread of activation in the arithmetic network. The reader may refer to
Mathis (2002) for a thorough discussion of three possible accounts (blocking, slowing, and inhibition) of similar context effects that were obtained
in a task involving object identification.

SEMANTIC PRIMING OF ADDITION FACTS

priming words. Experiment 2 was designed to eliminate this potential confounding between relatedness strength and analogical
alignment of semantic and arithmetic relations.

349

Table 5
Misaligned Functionally Related Word Triplets in Experiment 2

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Matching target

Nonmatching target

Experiment 2

Priming pair

Target

Priming pair

Target

Experiment 2 replicated the design of Experiment 1, except that
we replaced the MU primes used in Experiment 1 (e.g., clowns–
ovens) with misaligned functionally (MF) related primes (e.g.,
ships–sailors). Unlike the MU primes, the words in the MF primes
were highly related; however, the MF sets were also misaligned
with addition. In fact, they were aligned with the alternative
arithmetic operation of division (Bassok et al., 1998). By contrasting the magnitude of the sum effect for AC and MF primes, we
eliminated the confounding in Experiment 2 between the effects of
relatedness per se and the effects of semantic alignment. If the high
relatedness of the AC primes was responsible for the activation of
addition facts in Experiment 1, then we should observe similarly
high sum effects in both the AC and the MF priming conditions of
Experiment 2. But if, as we believe, the results of Experiment 1
were modulated by semantic alignment, then we should observe a
more pronounced sum effect in the AC than in the MF priming
condition of Experiment 2.

harps-strings
actors-stages
hikers-trails
wings-feathers
boats-oars
dressers–drawers
students–classes
bears–claws
flowers–petals
beaches–shells
beds–sheets
kitchens–aprons
farmers–hoes

harps
actors
hikers
feathers
oars
drawers
classes
claws
petals
shells
sheets
aprons
hoes

rings-fingers
hospitals-patients
ships-sailors
dentists-teeth
records-songs
jails–prisoners
theaters–movies
keys–pianos
letters–stamps
squirrels–nuts
dogs–bones
trains–tracks
churches–choirs

hands
germs
decks
drills
studios
handcuffs
oscars
composers
mailboxes
trees
kennels
stations
crosses

Method
Participants
One hundred nineteen University of Washington introductory
psychology students, 69 women and 50 men, participated for
course extra credit. All were native English speakers with normal
or corrected vision.

Materials
Digit triplets and AC word triplets were identical to those used
in Experiment 1 (see again Tables 3 and 1, respectively). MU word
triplets were replaced with MF triplets, which we constructed
using the databases and the selection criteria described in Experiment 1. The priming word pairs in the MF triplets were plural
nouns referring to objects known to be related by many-to-one
semantic relations, such as contain (e.g., birds– cages) or consume
(e.g., squirrels–nuts). Half of the MF triplets had matching targets
(e.g., harps, strings, and harps), and the other half had mismatching but thematically related targets (e.g., babies, cribs, and diapers). The MF word triplets used in Experiment 2 appear in
Table 5.
The word and the digit triplets were combined to form 160
experimental trials by the same randomized process used in Experiment 1. As in Experiment 1, relatedness ratings for all the
priming word pairs used in Experiment 2 were obtained from a
subset of participants (n ⫽ 87) after they had completed all the
experimental trials of the matching task. When analyzing these
relatedness ratings, we discovered that 2 of the 40 primes that
participants saw in the MF condition were, in fact, AC primes. We
excluded these 2 triplets from all data analyses. Relatedness ratings
of the 38 MF primes (M ⫽ 5.39, SD ⫽ 0.95) were significantly
higher than those of the 40 AC primes (M ⫽ 5.20, SD ⫽ 1.02),
t(86) ⫽ 2.53, p ⫽ .013.

In order to validate our intuitions about the nature of the relations between the priming words, we also asked a separate group
of 108 participants to rate, on a scale of 1–7, the degree to which
the priming words were categorically related (n ⫽ 55), or the
degree to which they were functionally related (n ⫽ 53). Each
participant rated half of the categorically related and half of the
functionally related word pairs used in the experiment. Their
ratings were consistent with our classification, and there was no
overlap in the rating distributions of the categorical and the functional word pairs. Specifically, the categorical ratings of the AC
pairs (M ⫽ 6.25, SD ⫽ 1.13) were significantly higher than those
of the MF pairs (M ⫽ 2.92, SD ⫽ 1.27), t(54) ⫽ 13.83, p ⬍ .001.
Similarly, the functional ratings of the MF pairs (M ⫽ 6.07, SD ⫽
0.72) were significantly higher than those of the AC pairs (M ⫽
1.79, SD ⫽ 0.85), t(52) ⫽ 26.82, p ⬍ .001.
The apparatus and the procedure used in Experiment 2 were the
same as in Experiment 1.

Results
As in Experiment 1, mean latencies of correct responses and
mean error rates were analyzed in separate 2 (priming words: AC,
MF) ⫻ 2 (digit target: sum, neutral) within-subjects repeated
measures ANOVAs.

Latencies
Mean latencies and standard errors for the sum and the neutral
targets in the AC and the MF priming conditions appear in the
upper part of Table 6. As in Experiment 1, geometric mean
latencies were computed on correct responses to sum and neutral
targets, excluding responses of trials in which participants responded incorrectly to the subsequently presented word targets.
The responses of 2 (out of 119) participants were excluded from
the analyses because they failed to respond correctly on any trials
in at least one condition. The mean number of responses per cell
that met these correctness criteria was 7.30 (SD ⫽ 1.8).
The pattern of results was similar to that observed in Experiment
1. Participants took significantly longer to reject the sum (863 ms)

BASSOK, PEDIGO, AND OSKARSSON

350

Table 6
Geometric Mean Latencies and Mean Errors Rates for Sum and
Neutral Targets in the Aligned-Categorical (AC) and the
Misaligned-Functional (MF) Priming Conditions of Experiment
2 (N ⫽ 117)
AC primes

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Response
Latency
M
SEM
% Errors
M
SEM

MF primes

Sum

Neutral

Sum

Neutral

876
15

824
13

850
14

837
14

30
2

26
2

25
2

25
2

than the neutral digit targets (831 ms), F(1, 116) ⫽ 17.68, MSE ⫽
6,877, p ⬍ .001.
More important, as in Experiment 1, there was a highly significant Priming Words ⫻ Target Digit interaction that was consistent
with the semantic alignment hypothesis, F(1, 116) ⫽ 6.18, MSE ⫽
6,829, p ⫽ .014. Specifically, planned comparisons revealed that,
in the semantically aligned AC condition, participants took 51 ms
longer to reject sum over neutral targets, t(116) ⫽ 4.26, p ⬍ .001.
By contrast, the comparable difference in the semantically misaligned MF condition was small and not significant (13 ms; p ⫽
.164).
The pattern of latencies for the sum and neutral targets in the AC
and MF conditions was also similar to the pattern observed in
Experiment 1. Sum latencies were significantly longer in the AC
than in the MF condition (a difference of 26 ms; SD ⫽ 134, p ⬍
.036). As in Experiment 1, neutral latencies tended to be shorter in
the AC than in the MF condition, but the difference was much
smaller and not significant (12 ms), t(116) ⫽ 1.21, p ⫽ .230. There
was no overall difference between the response latencies in the MF
condition (843 ms) and the AC condition (851 ms; F ⬍1).

Errors
Responses were coded as errors if participants gave “yes” responses to the nonmatching sum or neutral digit targets and,
irrespective of the correctness of their digit response, if they
responded incorrectly to the subsequently presented word targets.
The mean error rates and standard errors of the mean for the sum
and the neutral targets in the AC and the MF priming conditions
appear in the lower part of Table 6. The pattern of errors was
similar to that of the latency results, but only the main effect of
priming words was significant. Participants committed more errors
in the AC (28%) than in the MF condition (25%), F(1, 108) ⫽
3.92, MSE ⫽ 185.9, p ⬍ .02. The error rate was not significantly
higher for sum (27%) than for neutral targets (26%; p ⫽ .159, and
there was no significant interaction of Priming Words ⫻ Target
Digits (F ⬍ 1).

Discussion
In Experiment 2, we compared the magnitude of the sum effect
when the cue digits followed semantically AC primes and semantically MF primes. The pattern of latency results replicated the

pattern obtained in Experiment 1, showing that the sum effect was
significantly higher when digit cues were primed by categorically
related words than by functionally related words. The pattern of
errors was similar to that in the latency data, ruling out speed–
accuracy trade-offs as an explanation of the pattern of latency
differences across the priming conditions.
The interaction between the priming words and activation of
addition facts in Experiment 2 occurred even though, unlike in
Experiment 1, the word pairs comprising the misaligned primes
were highly related; in fact, they received significantly higher
relatedness ratings than did the word pairs comprising the AC
primes. Moreover, a separate group of participants from a similar
population made a clear distinction between categorical and thematic relations. Hence, in addition to replicating the findings of
Experiment 1, the results of Experiment 2 showed that obligatory
activation of addition facts is modulated by the congruence of the
priming semantic relation with addition and not just by the degree
of relatedness between the priming words.

General Discussion
The experiments reported in the present article show that semantic relations in word primes provide a context that modulates
automatic activation of addition facts. Categorically related word
primes, which provide a relational context that is appropriate for
addition, led to obligatory (involuntary) activation of addition
facts, replicating the pattern of latencies (sum effect) found in
studies of cognitive arithmetic (LeFevre et al., 1988). Unrelated
word primes (Experiment 1) and functionally related word primes
(Experiment 2), which provide a relational context that is inappropriate for addition, blocked such automatic activation of addition
facts.
The fluent coordination between semantic and arithmetic relations found in the present study is consistent with people’s extensive experience with applications of addition to real-life problems.
Obviously, people are capable of adding unrelated or functionally
related objects—and in some contexts, people are even asked to do
so (e.g., adding flowers, vases, and milk cartons when choosing the
express checkout in a supermarket). Yet, both in and out of school,
people mainly add highly similar or categorically related objects.
The present results indicate that such semantic “applicability conditions” modulate people’s spontaneous access to addition facts,
thereby highlighting the importance of arithmetic applications to
theoretical accounts of mental arithmetic. In particular, the fluency
with which people integrate categorical object relations with their
knowledge of addition facts should be incorporated into models of
arithmetic competence that, to date, separate people’s arithmetic
knowledge from the rest of their conceptual knowledge (for a
review, see Campbell & Epp, 2005).
The finding that an incongruent semantic context blocks obligatory activation of addition facts may be viewed as quite surprising, as it “flies in the face of any automaticity account in which the
specified processes cannot be prevented from being set in motion”
(Besner, Stolz, & Boutilier, 1997, p. 221). Yet, a growing body of
evidence shows similar modulation effects, be it in word recognition (e.g., Besner & Stolz, 1999), object recognition (Mathis,
2002), or even in cognitive arithmetic (Rusconi, Galfano, Speriani,
& Umiltà, 2004). Our results seem to support the conclusions of
Besner and colleagues, who, in discussing automatic access to

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

SEMANTIC PRIMING OF ADDITION FACTS

word meanings, have suggested that processes that are considered
as obligatory or “ballistic” should, instead, be treated as a “default”
that can be overridden by context. In cognitive arithmetic, this
overriding context could be an incongruent spatial configuration,
as shown by Ruscani et al. (2004), or, as in the present study,
semantically incongruent applicability conditions.
According to Bassok et al. (1998), the congruity between arithmetic operations and their application context is determined by
semantic alignment. For the operation of addition, this entails
analogical mapping between the semantic roles of categorically
related objects with respect to their joint superset, and the mathematical roles of the addends with respect to their sum. Bassok and
her colleagues found that people are guided by such alignments
when they solve or construct mathematical word problems (Bassok, 2001). The results of the present experiments extend this prior
work by showing that, for the operation of addition, aligned
semantic relations prime access to analogous arithmetic relations,
whereas misaligned semantic relations block such access.
The priming results reported here are consistent with prior work
that has established the viability of analogical priming (Spellman
et al., 2001). Using lexical decision and word-naming tasks, Spellman et al. (2001) found that word pairs (e.g., bear–cave) were
processed faster when they were primed by word pairs that shared
the same semantic relation (e.g., bird–nest) than when they were
primed by word pairs that had a different semantic relation (e.g.,
window–glass). Such relational facilitation, however, was not
completely automatic—it occurred only when the participants
were explicitly directed to attend to and use the shared semantic
relations in the priming and the target word pairs.
In the experiments reported here, unlike the study of Spellman
et al. (2001), the alignment of the categorical semantic relation
(e.g., tulips and daisies are flowers) with addition (e.g., 2 ⫹ 3 ⫽
5) appears to be highly automatic.7 One reason for this difference
could be that Spellman et al. assessed analogical priming using a
different methodology. In particular, our experimental task juxtaposed word and digit pairs (see Figure 1) in a manner that was
likely to evoke the context of arithmetic applications. It is therefore
possible that this juxtaposition alleviated the need for explicit
instructions that focus people’s attention on relational similarities.
Of course, it is also possible that access to semantically aligned
arithmetic operations is, in fact, more automatic than is access to
semantic analogies. This possibility would be consistent with
people’s extensive experience in using the same arithmetic operation (e.g., addition) to solve problems involving a variety of
semantically aligned object sets (e.g., blue and red marbles; cars
and trucks, cupcakes and brownies). Such an experience should
lead to abstraction of operation-relevant relational commonalities
(Hummel & Holyoak, 2003) and, in turn, increase the probability
of spontaneous analogical access (Forbus et al., 1995; Hummel &
Holyoak, 1997).
Although the present findings are consistent with prior work on
relational priming (Spellman et al., 2001) and on semantic alignments in word problems (Bassok et al., 1998), they are restricted
to the correspondence between categorical relations and the operation of addition. It remains to be established whether the present
pattern of priming results can be extended to other combinations of
semantic and arithmetic relations. In particular, to preclude the
possibility that these findings were mediated by the unique properties of categorical relations, one would want to determine

351

whether functionally related sets, but not categorically related sets,
prime division facts. The generality of our findings and the validity
of our relational-priming interpretation have to await future research.
In conclusion, the present studies show that the semantic conditions for applying the arithmetic operation of addition modulate
automatic access to digit sums. These findings have direct bearing
on researchers’ understanding of mental arithmetic. In particular,
to the extent that addition facts are represented in a specialized
arithmetic memory network, the present findings show that this
network is seamlessly coordinated with people’s semantic knowledge. Because the semantic conditions for applying arithmetic
operations are relational in nature, the present findings probably
reflect automatic analogical alignment of semantic and arithmetic
relations. Further research is needed to validate this processing
conjecture and determine the generality of our findings.

7
In line with the earlier discussion of automaticity, we do not mean to
imply that this process is obligatory and cannot be prevented from being set
in motion.

References
Alf, E. F., & Grossberg, J. M. (1979). The geometric mean: Confidence
limits and significance tests. Perception & Psychophysics, 26, 419 – 421.
Ashcraft, M. H. (1992). Cognitive arithmetic: A review of data and theory.
Cognition, 44, 75–106.
Ashcraft, M. H., & Battaglia, J. (1978). Cognitive arithmetic: Evidence for
retrieval and decision processes in mental addition. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Learning and Memory, 4, 527–538.
Bassok, M. (2001). Semantic alignments in mathematical word problems.
In D. Gentner, K. J. Holyoak, & B. N. Kokinov (Eds.), The analogical
mind: Perspectives from cognitive science (pp. 401– 433). Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Bassok, M., Chase, V. M., & Martin, S. A. (1998). Adding apples and
oranges: Alignment of semantic and formal knowledge. Cognitive Psychology, 35, 99 –134.
Bassok, M., Wu, L. L., & Olseth, K. L. (1995). Judging a book by its cover:
Interpretative effects of content on problem-solving transfer. Memory &
Cognition, 23, 354 –367.
Battig, W. F., & Montague, W. E. (1969). Category norms of verbal items
in 56 categories: A replication extension of the Connecticut category
norms. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 80, 1– 46.
Besner, D., & Stolz, J. A. (1999). Context dependency in Stroop’s paradigm: When are words treated as nonlinguistic objects? Canadian Journal of Experimental Psychology, 53, 374 –380.
Besner, D., Stolz, J. A., & Boutilier, C. (1997). The Stroop effect and the
myth of automaticity. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 4, 221–225.
Campbell, J. I. D. (1987). Network interference and mental multiplication.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 13, 109 –123.
Campbell, J. I. D. (1995). Architectures for numerical cognition. Cognition, 53, 1– 44.
Campbell, J. I. D. (2005). Handbook of mathematical cognition. New
York: Psychology Press.
Campbell, J. I. D., & Epp, L. J. (2005). Architectures for arithmetic. In
J. I. D. Campbell (Ed.), Handbook of mathematical cognition (pp.
347–360). New York: Psychology Press.
Carraher, D. W., & Schliemann, A. D. (2000). Lessons from everyday
reasoning in mathematics education: Realism versus meaningfulness. In
D. H. Jonassen & S. M. Land (Eds.), Theoretical foundations of learning
environments (pp. 173–195). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

352

BASSOK, PEDIGO, AND OSKARSSON

Coltheart, M. (1981), The MRC psycholinguistic database. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 33A, 497–505.
Dagenbach, D., Carr, T. H., & Barnhardt, T. M. (1990). Inhibitory semantic
priming of lexical decisions due to failure to retrieve weakly activated
codes. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 16, 328 –340.
De Corte, E., & Verschaffel, L. (1996). An empirical test of the impact of
primitive intuitive models of operations on solving word problems with
a multiplicative structure. Learning and Instruction, 6, 219 –242.
Dehaene, S., & Cohen, L. (1995). Toward an anatomical and functional
model of number processing. Mathematical Cognition, 1, 83–120.
Dixon, J. A. (2005). Mathematical problem solving: The roles of exemplar,
schema, and relational representations. In J. I. D. Campbell (Ed.),
Handbook of mathematical cognition (pp. 379 –395). New York: Psychology Press.
English, L. D., & Halford, G. S. (1995). Mathematics education: Models
and processes. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Fischbein, E., Deri, M., Nello, M. S., & Marino, M. S. (1985). The role of
implicit models in solving verbal problems in multiplication and division. Journal of Research in Mathematics Education, 16, 3–17.
Forbus, K. D., Gentner, D., & Law, K. (1995). MAC/FAC: A model of
similarity-based retrieval. Cognitive Science, 19, 141–205.
Geary, D. C., & Widaman, K. F. (1987). Individual differences in cognitive
arithmetic. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 116, 154 –
171.
Greeno, J. G. (1987). Instructional representations based on research about
understanding. In A. Schoenfeld (Ed.), Cognitive science and mathematics education (pp. 61– 88). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Hegarty, M., Mayer, R. E., & Monk, C. A. (1995). Comprehension of
arithmetic word problems: A comparison of successful and unsuccessful
problem solvers. Journal of Educational Psychology, 87, 18 –32.
Herd, S. A., Banich, M. T., & O’Reilly, R. C. (2006). Neural mechanisms
of cognitive control: An integrative model of Stroop task performance
and fMRI data. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 18, 22–32.
Hinsley, D. A., Hayes, J. R., & Simon, H. A. (1977). From words to
equations: Meaning and representation in algebra word problems. In
M. A. Just & P. A. Carpenter (Eds.), Cognitive processes in comprehension (pp. 89 –106). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Hummel, J. E., & Holyoak, K. J. (1997). Distributed representations of
structure: A theory of analogical access and mapping. Psychological
Review, 104, 427– 466.
Hummel, J. E., & Holyoak, K. J. (2003). A symbolic-connectionist theory
of relational inference and generalization. Psychological Review, 110,
220 –264.
Inquisit 1.31 [Computer software] (2000). Seattle, WA: Millisecond Software LLC.
Jonides, J., & Mack, R. (1984). On the cost and benefit of cost and benefit.
Psychological Bulletin, 96, 29 – 44.
Kahan, T. A. (2000). Negative priming from masked words: Retrospective

prime clarification or center-surround inhibition? Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 26, 1392–1410.
Kintsch, W. (1988). The role of knowledge in discourse comprehension: A
construction integration model. Psychological Review, 95, 163–182.
Koedinger, K. R., & Nathan, M. J. (2004). The real story behind story
problems: Effects of representations on quantitative reasoning. The
Journal of the Learning Sciences, 13, 129 –164.
LeFevre, J., Bisanz, J., & Mrkonjic, L. (1988). Cognitive arithmetic:
Evidence for obligatory activation of arithmetic facts. Memory & Cognition, 16, 45–53.
LeFevre, J., & Kulak, A. G. (1994). Individual differences in the obligatory
activation of addition facts. Memory & Cognition, 22, 188 –200.
Lu, H., Morrison, R. G., Hummel, J. E., & Holyoak, K. J. (2006). Role of
gamma-band synchronization in priming of form discrimination for
multiobject displays. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 32, 610 – 617.
Martin, S. A., & Bassok, M. (2005). Effects of semantic cues on mathematical modeling: Evidence from word-problem solving and equation
construction tasks. Memory & Cognition, 33, 471– 478.
Mathis, K. M. (2002). Semantic inference from objects both in and out of
a scene context. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 28, 171–182.
McCloskey, M. (1992). Cognitive mechanisms in numerical processing:
Evidence from acquired dyscalculia. Cognition, 44, 107–157.
Meyer, D. E., & Schvaneveldt, R. W. (1971). Facilitation in recognizing
pairs of words: Evidence of a dependence between retrieval operations.
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 90, 227–234.
Nesher, P. (1989). Microworlds in mathematical education: A pedagogical
realism. In L. B. Resnick (Ed.), Knowing, learning, and instruction:
Essays in honor of Robert Glaser (pp. 187–215). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Rusconi, E., Galfano, G., Speriani, V., & Umiltà, C. (2004). Capacity and
contextual constraints on product activation: Evidence from taskirrelevant fact retrieval. The Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 57A, 1485–1511.
Saxe, G. B. (1988). The mathematics of child street vendors. Child Development, 59, 1415–1425.
Schreuder, R., Giovanni, F. D. B., & Glazenborg, G. (1984). Effects of
perceptual and conceptual similarity in semantic priming. Psychological
Research, 45, 339 –354.
Siegler, R. S. (1987). The perils of averaging data over strategies: An
example from children’s addition. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
General, 116, 250 –264.
Spellman, B. A., Holyoak, K. J., & Morrison, R. G. (2001). Analogical
priming via semantic relations. Memory & Cognition, 29, 383–393.

Received July 20, 2007
Revision received October 14, 2007
Accepted October 22, 2007 䡲

