Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition
2008, Vol. 34, No. 1, 50 – 64

Copyright 2008 by the American Psychological Association
0278-7393/08/$12.00 DOI: 10.1037/0278-7393.34.1.50

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Contextual Effects on Reading Aloud: Evidence for Pathway Control
Michael Reynolds

Derek Besner

Trent University

University of Waterloo

Recent evidence suggests that the processes responsible for generating a phonological code from print are
flexible in skilled readers. An important goal, therefore, is to identify the conditions that lead to changes
in how a phonological code is computed. Five experiments are reported that examine whether phonological processes change as predicted by the pathway control hypothesis when reading aloud words and
nonwords. Changes in reading processes were assessed by measuring the effect of predictable switches
between stimulus categories across trials. The results of the present experiments are argued to be
consistent with the pathway control hypothesis.
Keywords: pathway control hypothesis, reading aloud, exogenous control, executive control, phonology

Accounts of skilled reading often describe the process of translating print into sound as the flow of activation through a series of
distinct process-specific modules (e.g., Coltheart, Rastle, Perry,
Langdon, & Ziegler, 2001; Morton, 1969; Perry, Ziegler, & Zorzi,
2007; Plaut, McClelland, Seidenberg, & Patterson, 1996; Zorzi,
Houghton, & Butterworth, 1998). The role of each process-specific
module is context independent. That is, currently implemented
computational models simulate skilled reading with little consideration of how these process-specific modules may vary in response to context. Processing in these accounts is structurally
determined in the sense that the same computations are always
performed in the same way on a stimulus (Underwood, 1978). For
this reason, it is sometimes argued that computational models of
reading meet all of the requirements for automatic processing (e.g.,
McCann, Remington, & Van Selst, 2000).
Although computational models of reading are often structurally
determined, this assumption is not without controversy. Indeed, a
number of researchers have also proposed dynamic accounts of
word and nonword reading (e.g., Balota & Yap, 2006; Baluch &
Besner, 1991; Coltheart & Rastle, 1994; Havelka & Rastle, 2005;
Kello & Plaut, 2003; Monsell, Patterson, Graham, Hughes, &
Milroy, 1992; Rastle & Coltheart, 1999; Reynolds & Besner,
2005a; 2005b; Tabossi & Laghi, 1992; Zevin & Balota, 2000).
Much of this research has been couched in terms of localist
dual-route models of reading (e.g., Coltheart et al., 2001). We
therefore begin by considering the characteristics of Coltheart et
al.’s (2001) dual-route cascaded (DRC) model.1

The DRC Model
The DRC model of visual word recognition and reading aloud
generates a phonological code from print using two different
pathways (see Figure 1). The nonlexical pathway (Pathway B in
Figure 1) assembles a phonological code using sublexical grapheme to phoneme correspondences. This pathway generates a correct pronunciation for regular words (e.g., hint) and nonwords
(e.g., zint) but regularizes exception words (e.g., pint is read so as
to rhyme with hint). The lexical pathway (Pathway A in Figure 1)
addresses a lexical-phonological code from a lexical-orthographic
code. This pathway generates a correct pronunciation for regular
words (e.g., hint) and exception words (e.g., pint). The lexical
pathway does not generate a correct pronunciation for nonwords
(e.g., zint) because their spellings are not represented in the orthographic input lexicon. Thus, although both routes are always
active, the correct pronunciation of a nonword requires the nonlexical pathway, and the correct pronunciation of an exception
word requires the lexical pathway.
Although DRC currently simulates reading aloud with a static
processing architecture, processing can be rendered dynamic by
changing parameters so as to be responsive to the context in which
the items are being read. However, without a theory to guide such
parameter changes, this would be an incredibly laborious process.
This is because although DRC has a transparent structural architecture (e.g., lexical and nonlexical pathways for translating print
into sound, separate orthographic and phonological lexicons), its
functional architecture is surprisingly opaque (see Reynolds &
Besner, 2002, for one such illustration). DRC not only has more
than 30 parameters, but it also has serial and parallel processing
components (the nonlexical and lexical pathways, respectively),

Michael Reynolds, Department of Psychology, Trent University, Peterborough, Ontario, Canada; Derek Besner, Department of Psychology,
University of Waterloo, Waterloo, Ontario, Canada.
This work was supported by Natural Sciences and Engineering Research
Council of Canada Grant A0998 to Derek Besner and a doctoral fellowship
to Michael Reynolds.
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Michael Reynolds, Department of Psychology, Trent University, 1600 West Bank Drive, Peterborough, Ontario K8J 7B8, Canada. E-mail: michaelchanreynolds@
trentu.ca

1

Perry et al.’s (2007) connectionist dual-process (CDP⫹) model is
similar to Coltheart et al.’s (2001) DRC model in that it contains lexical
and nonlexical pathways for generating a phonological code. Indeed, the
lexical route is taken from the DRC model. The nonlexical pathway differs
in some respects. The most notable difference is that that the grapheme to
phoneme rules used in DRC were replaced by an orthography to phonology
network that is sensitive to the consistency of the spelling–sound correspondences in the CDP⫹ model.
50

CONTEXT EFFECTS
PRINT

Feature and Letter
Processing

Pathway A

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Addressed
Phonological
Recoding

Pathway B

Orthographic Input
Lexicon

Assembled
Phonological
Recoding
Phonological
Output Lexicon

51

number of studies (e.g., Baluch & Besner 1991; Monsell et al.,
1992; Reynolds & Besner, 2005b; Tabossi & Laghi, 1992; Zevin
& Balota, 2000). For instance, Monsell et al. (1992) examined
whether skilled readers would change how they generate a phonological code by changing the context in which words were read.
They had participants read aloud either a pure list of exception
words or these same exception words intermixed with nonwords.
They hypothesized that the nonlexical route would be deemphasized when the pure list of exception words was read aloud but not
when the exception words were mixed with nonwords. Consistent
with the pathway control hypothesis, they reported that highfrequency exception words were read aloud faster in the pure list
context than in the mixed list context.

Response Time (RT) Homogenization
Phoneme Buffer

PRONUNCIATION

Figure 1. The structural architecture of Coltheart, Rastle, Perry, Langdon, and Ziegler’s (2001) dual-route model of reading.

facilitatory and inhibitory connections, and interactive activation
between four levels of representation. Transforming DRC into a
dynamic account of reading aloud therefore requires specification
of when processing changes, what processes are affected, and what
types of processing changes occur. We do not claim to provide all
the relevant information on the basis of the results of the present
experiments. However, these results are relevant to such modeling.

The Pathway Control Hypothesis
One dynamic account of reading aloud that has been proposed
on the basis of the localist dual-route framework is the pathway
control hypothesis (Baluch & Besner, 1991; Coltheart & Rastle,
1994; Havelka & Rastle, 2005; Monsell et al., 1992; Rastle &
Coltheart, 1999; Reynolds & Besner, 2005b; Tabossi & Laghi,
1992; Zevin & Balota, 2000). This account postulates that the
relative contribution of a particular pathway for translating print
into sound will be emphasized or deemphasized in response to the
type of stimuli being read aloud. In particular, the relative contribution of a pathway will be increased when it is required to read
a class of stimuli correctly and decreased when it cannot generate
a correct pronunciation for that class of stimuli.
The pathway control hypothesis makes a number of straightforward predictions in the context of DRC. Namely, the nonlexical
pathway will be emphasized when nonwords are read aloud because it is required to generate a correct pronunciation for items
not represented in the orthographic and phonological lexicons.
Similarly, the lexical pathway will be emphasized when exception
words are read aloud because it is required to generate a correct
pronunciation for words that do not follow the model’s grapheme–
phoneme conversion rules.
The hypothesis that control over reading aloud is intimately
associated with the distinction between lexical and nonlexical
procedures for translating print into sound has been the focus of a

Although the results from Monsell et al. (1992) and other studies
are consistent with the claim that the process of generating a
phonological code changes across contexts, such data have also
been argued to be consistent with a very different interpretation.
Lupker and colleagues (Chateau & Lupker, 2003; Kinoshita &
Lupker, 2002; 2003; Lupker, Brown, & Colombo, 1997; Taylor &
Lupker, 2001) have proposed that these same data are better
understood in terms of changes outside the reading system. According to their RT homogenization account, skilled readers use a
time criterion to determine when they will make an overt response.
This time criterion for responding is adjusted on a trial-by-trial
basis in response to the relative speed of the previous trial and is
influenced by how long it takes, on average, to respond in a
particular context (e.g., over a block of trials). Thus, the time
criterion is set earlier following a fast trial and later following a
slow trial. The consequence of these adjustments is that mixing
fast and slow stimuli in a single block results in slower responses
to the fast stimuli and faster responses to the slow stimuli. Critically, RT homogenization is not influenced by the nature of the
stimuli (e.g., whether the stimulus is a word or a nonword).
Compelling support for the claim that participants do homogenize their responses has been reported in a number of studies (e.g.,
Chateau & Lupker, 2003; Kinoshita & Lupker, 2002; 2003; Lupker et al., 1997; Raman, Baluch, & Besner, 2004; Taylor &
Lupker, 2001). The results of these and other studies led Kinoshita
and Lupker (2003, p. 414) to conclude that, “there is still no
compelling evidence that target naming latency is affected by the
qualitative nature of the context stimuli in the way proposed by the
pathway control hypothesis.”
It is important to note that the RT homogenization account and
the pathway control hypothesis need not be mutually exclusive. It
may well be that contextual changes in reading aloud performance
are a consequence of both RT homogenization and changes in
pathway emphasis. At present, it seems clear that reading performance is affected by RT homogenization; it is less clear whether
there is also strong evidence for contextual changes in how a
phonological code is generated as predicted by the pathway control
hypothesis (but see Balota & Yap, 2006; Reynolds & Besner,
2005b; Zevin & Balota, 2000).
Reynolds and Besner (2005b) suggested that the probability of
observing changes in how a phonological code is generated may be
influenced by the predictability of events in a given context. If
there is substantial uncertainty about the nature of an upcoming

REYNOLDS AND BESNER

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

52

item (as is the case in mixed list contexts, where the probability
that the next item could be a word or a nonword is often equal),
then it is unlikely that skilled readers will change how they
generate a phonological code. Thus, even if a correct pronunciation for an exception word is dependent on the lexical pathway and
a correct pronunciation for a nonword is dependent on the nonlexical pathway, there is little point in emphasizing one pathway
over the other on a trial-by-trial basis if the reader cannot predict
what type of stimulus appears on the next trial. Skilled reading
performance therefore needs to be examined as a function of
stimulus characteristics in a predictable context to assess whether
the process of generating phonological code is static or dynamic.
Reynolds and Besner (2005b) proposed that Rogers and Monsell’s (1995) alternating runs paradigm could be used to create
such context. In this procedure, participants perform two tasks in
a predictable AABB sequence. The alternating runs paradigm has
traditionally been used to examine how processing is affected
when switching between different tasks by comparing RTs on
switch (A3 B, B3 A) and stay trials (A3 A, B3 B). According
to Rogers and Monsell’s logic, if (a) the mental processes used to
complete each task change on a trial-by-trial basis, (b) adjusting
these processes takes time, and (c) at least part of this reconfiguration cost is driven by the presence of the stimulus, then it should
take longer to respond on switch trials (A3 B or B3 A) than on
stay trials (A3 A, B3 B). Thus, an increase in RT on switch trials
relative to stay trials (a switch cost) is evidence that switching
from one task to another requires reconfiguring the mental processes used to complete a task.

Reynolds and Besner (2005b) used the alternating runs procedure to examine whether contextual changes within a script (English) lead to changes in how a phonological code is computed as
predicted by the pathway control hypothesis. Participants read
aloud low-frequency exception words and nonwords in an AABB
sequence. If the process(es) used to generate a phonological code
change as a function of stimulus characteristics as predicted by the
pathway control hypothesis and if (a) adjusting the relative contribution from the lexical and the nonlexical pathways takes time
and (b) at least part of this reconfiguration is driven by the
presence of a letter string, then it should take longer to respond on
switch trials (A3 B or B3 A) than on stay trials (A3 A, B3 B).
Consistent with the relative contributions from lexical and nonlexical
pathways changing when skilled readers generated a phonological
code, Reynolds and Besner (2005b) reported switch costs both for the
low-frequency exception words and for nonwords.
Here, we report five new experiments that use Reynolds and
Besner’s (2005b) procedure to further examine whether the process of generating a phonological code is dynamic in the way
predicted by the pathway control hypothesis. These experiments
are organized into two sections. The first three experiments examine whether trial-by-trial control is observed. The remaining two
experiments examine whether there are circumstances in which
skilled readers use a single experiment-wide set. Overall, the
results of these experiments are consistent with the pathway control hypothesis.

Switch Costs

We first report three experiments that explore the conditions that
result in skilled readers changing their reading style within a block
of trials as predicted by the pathway control hypothesis. Following
Reynolds and Besner’s (2005b) procedures, participants read aloud
two classes of stimuli in an alternating AABB sequence. Whether
participants are adapting their reading style on a trial-by-trial basis
in response to the type of stimuli is inferred from the presence or
absence of a switch cost.

It is important to note that there is considerable debate concerning whether the increase in RT on switch trials compared with stay
trials indexes a reconfiguration cost (e.g., Rogers & Monsell,
1995; see also Monsell, 2003), carryover from the previous trial
(proactive interference; see Allport, Styles, & Hsieh, 1994; Allport
& Wylie, 2000; Waszak, Hommel, & Allport, 2003; 2004), or
both. The important point here is that both of these accounts are
consistent with the interpretation that mental processing is changing in response to changes in task demands (see Pashler, 2000, for
a review).
The alternating runs procedure has also been used to examine
whether processing changes even when the task is held constant.
For instance, von Studnitz and Green (1997) adapted Rogers and
Monsell’s (1995) procedure to examine the control processes
operating when bilingual participants perform lexical decision to
letter strings from different languages. Consistent with different
parameter settings being used to recognize words displayed in
English and German, performance was slower on switch trials
(A3 B, B3 A) compared with stay trials (A3 A, B3 B). Similarly, Shafiullah and Monsell (1999) adapted Rogers and Monsell’s (1995) procedure to examine whether different mechanisms
were involved when words from the different Japanese orthographies were read aloud. Consistent with different scripts using
different processing mechanisms, Shafiullah and Monsell (1999)
found slower performance on switch trials (A3 B, B3 A) compared with stay trials (A3 A, B3 B) when participants switched
between reading aloud items written in Kana (the Japanese syllabic
script) and Kanji (the Japanese ideographic script).

Part 1: Trial-by-Trial Changes in Pathway Emphasis

Experiment 1
Experiment 1 examined a simple prediction of the pathway
control hypothesis by having participants read aloud highfrequency exception words and nonwords in a predictable AABB
sequence. If exception words are read aloud by emphasizing the
lexical route and nonwords are read aloud by emphasizing the
nonlexical route, then switch costs should be observed when
switching between lexical categories.2
2

There are, of course, alternative accounts of visual word recognition
and reading aloud, most notably the parallel distributed processing framework (e.g., Plaut et al., 1996). In these accounts, it is possible for highfrequency exception words and nonwords to be read aloud by recourse to
a single process (orthography⫺hidden units⫺phonology). In the context of
such an account, the pathway control hypothesis would not, a priori, predict
trial-by-trial control over how a phonological code is being generated. In
contrast, it would predict the switch costs observed by Reynolds and
Besner when low-frequency exception words and nonwords were read
aloud (see Reynolds and Besner, 2005b).

CONTEXT EFFECTS

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Method
Participants. Sixteen undergraduate students from the University of Waterloo, Waterloo, Ontario, Canada were each paid $4.00
to participate in the present experiment. All individuals had normal
or corrected-to-normal vision and were native English speakers.
Stimuli. Experiment 1 used 50 high-frequency exception
words (as defined by DRC; mean frequency ⫽ 311 according the
Celex database; Baayen, Piepenbrock, & van Rijn, 1993) and 50
nonwords (see Appendix A). The nonwords were generated by
rotating the onsets and bodies in the exception words where
possible. Therefore, 97% of the unique orthographic bodies from
the exception words were repeated in the nonwords.
Apparatus. Stimulus presentation was controlled by a Pentium
IV 1.8 GHz computer running Eprime 1.1 software (Schneider,
Eschman, & Zuccolotto, 2001). Vocal responses were collected
using a Plantronics LS1 microphone headset (Santa Cruz, CA) and
a voice-key assembly. Stimuli were displayed on a 17-inch (43.18cm) ADI Microscan monitor (Taipei, Taiwan).
Procedure. The type of stimulus used on the initial trial (e.g.,
exception word or nonword) and whether a particular item would
occur in a switch or stay context were counterbalanced across
participants. Participants were assigned to one of four counterbalance conditions on the basis of the order in which they arrived in
the lab.
Participants were tested individually and were seated approximately 50 cm from the computer monitor. A practice block consisted of eight trials to familiarize participants with the procedure.
At the end of the practice session, participants were given limited
feedback about their performance. Feedback about accuracy was
limited to the regularizations of the exception words, lexicalizations of the nonwords, hesitations, and the addition or subtraction
of phonemes.
The experimental block consisted of 100 trials. Each trial began
with a fixation marker (“⫹”) displayed at the center of the screen.
The fixation marker remained on the screen for 1,000 ms, followed
by a blank screen for 250 ms, and then the target, which remained
on the screen until a vocal response was made. Once the stimulus
disappeared, the screen remained blank for 1,000 ms before the
next trial began. Thus, the response–stimulus interval was 2,250
ms.
Responses were classified by the experimenter during the
response–stimulus interval as correct, incorrect, or voice-key failure. A pronunciation error was defined as an utterance that represented a clear mispronunciation of the word or nonword (i.e., an
extra or deleted phoneme, hesitation or pause, stutter, regularization of the exception words, or lexicalization of the nonwords).
Participants were asked to read the letter strings aloud quickly
and accurately. Exception words were described as words that do
not sound like they look. Nonwords were described as stimuli that
could be words but were not. Participants were told that the type
of stimulus followed a predictable AABB sequence but were not
given any explicit instructions about how to read the nonwords.

Results
Participant data were analyzed using a repeated-measures analysis of variance (ANOVA) with stimulus type (e.g., words–
nonwords) and switch condition (switch–stay) as factors. Item data

53

were analyzed using a mixed-model ANOVA with stimulus type
as a between factor and switch condition as a repeated factor. The
RT data were converted into z scores for the item analysis to
reduce the impact of participant variability. We computed z scores
for each participant by collapsing across conditions.
Trials on which there was an incorrect pronunciation (6.2%) or
a voice-key failure (4.1%) were removed prior to the RT analysis.
RTs to correct responses were subjected to a recursive trimming
procedure in which the criterion cutoff for outlier removal was
established independently for each condition for each participant
by reference to the sample size in that cell (Van Selst & Jolicoeur,
1994). This resulted in the removal of 2.0% of the correct RT data.
Correct RT and percentage error (PE) can be seen in Table 1.
RT. The exception words were read aloud faster than were
nonwords, F1(1, 15) ⫽ 39.3, p ⬍ .001, MSE ⫽ 1,045, ␩2 ⫽ .724;
F2(1, 98) ⫽ 58.9, p ⬍ .001, MSE ⫽ 0.414, ␩2 ⫽ .375. The time
to read aloud was longer on switch than on stay trials, F1(1, 15) ⫽
10.7, p ⬍ .001, MSE ⫽ 163, ␩2 ⫽ .417; F2(1, 98) ⫽ 6.3, p ⬍ .05,
MSE ⫽ 0.108, ␩2 ⫽ .07. There was no interaction between
stimulus type and switch condition (Fs ⬍ 1.3).
PE. More errors were made to nonwords than to words, F1(1,
15) ⫽ 51.9, p ⬍ .001, MSE ⫽ 33.9, ␩2 ⫽ .776; F2(1, 98) ⫽ 33.2,
p ⬍ .001, MSE ⫽ 160, ␩2 ⫽ .253. No other effects approached
significance (Fs ⬍ 1).

Discussion
A switch cost was observed for both the high-frequency exception words and the nonwords, replicating the pattern of results
reported by Reynolds and Besner (2005b) for low-frequency exception words and nonwords. This outcome is consistent with
skilled readers emphasizing the lexical pathway when reading
aloud exception words and the nonlexical pathway when reading
aloud nonwords as predicted by the pathway control hypothesis.

Experiment 2
The vast majority of the exception word and nonword stimuli
used in Experiment 1 shared orthographic bodies (e.g., “ave” in
have and bave). As a consequence, the majority of the bodies read
aloud in Experiment 1 were assigned both an irregular and a
regular pronunciation. An alternative account of these data, therefore, is that participants changed how a phonological code was
generated to minimize the impact of a previously assigned phonoTable 1
Mean Response Time (RT) and Percentage Error (PE) for HighFrequency Exception Words and Nonwords as a Function of
Switch and Stay Trials in Experiment 1
High-frequency
exception words

Nonwords

Trial

RT

PE

RT

PE

Switch
Stay
Difference

491
478
13

2.0
0.5
1.5

539
531
8

12.2
11.3
1.0

Note. Ninety-seven percent of the unique orthographic bodies in the
exception words are repeated in the nonwords. RTs are in milliseconds.

REYNOLDS AND BESNER

54

logical code that may not be appropriate in the present context
(e.g., /æv/ from have when reading bave). This same confound
exists in the experiment reported by Reynolds and Besner (2005b).
If the switch costs observed in Experiment 1 were entirely due
to orthographic overlap at the level of rimes between the exception
words and nonwords, then a switch cost should not be observed
when this overlap is reduced. In contrast, if the switch costs are a
consequence of the fact that the exception word and nonword
stimuli require different procedures for generating a correct phonological code, then a switch cost should still be observed for both
classes of items.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Method
Participants. Sixteen undergraduate students from the University of Waterloo were each paid $4.00 to participate in the present
experiment. All individuals had normal or corrected-to-normal
vision and were native English speakers.
Stimuli. Experiment 2 used the 50 high-frequency exception
words from Experiment 1 and a new set of 50 nonwords (see
Appendix B). Only 37% of the unique orthographic bodies from
the exception words were repeated in the nonwords, as compared
with 97% in Experiment 1.
Apparatus and procedure. The apparatus and procedure were
the same as those used in Experiment 1.

Results
Trials on which there was an incorrect pronunciation (4.6%) or
a voice-key failure (2.3%) were removed prior to the RT analysis;
2.3% of the correct RT data were removed due to the trimming
procedure. Correct RT and PE can be seen in Table 2.
RT. The exception words were read aloud faster than were
nonwords, F1(1, 15) ⫽ 86.1, p ⬍ .001, MSE ⫽ 729, ␩2 ⫽ .85;
F2(1, 98) ⫽ 147.7, p ⬍ .001, MSE ⫽ .267, ␩2 ⫽ .61. There was
also a significant switch cost, F1(1, 15) ⫽ 24.7, p ⬍ .001, MSE ⫽
181, ␩2 ⫽ .62; F2(1, 98) ⫽ 22.6, p ⬍ .001, MSE ⫽ .114, ␩2 ⫽ .19.
There was no interaction between stimulus type and switch condition (F1 ⬍ 1.5, ␩2 ⫽ .08; F2 ⫽ ⬍ 1, ␩2 ⬍ .01).
PE. More errors were made to nonwords than to words, F1(1,
15) ⫽ 18.3, p ⬍ .001, MSE ⫽ 34.1, ␩2 ⫽ .55; F2(1, 98) ⫽ 18.0,
p ⬍ .001, MSE ⫽ 108, ␩2 ⫽ .16. There was no effect of switch
condition (F1 ⬍ 1, ␩2 ⬍ .01; F2 ⬍ 1, ␩2 ⬍ .01), nor was there an

interaction between stimulus type and switch condition, F1(1,
15) ⫽ 1.4, ␩2 ⫽ .08; F2 ⬍ 1, ␩2 ⬍ .01.

Discussion
Statistically symmetric switch costs were again observed for
both classes of items. The persistence of a switch cost despite
reduced orthographic overlap between the exception word and
nonword rimes is consistent with phonological processing changing as predicted by the pathway control hypothesis. It should also
be noted that reducing orthographic overlap did not lead to a
reduction in the size of the switch cost as compared with Experiment 1. As such, the present data suggest that phonological
discordance due to ubiquitous orthographic overlap at the level of
rimes is not a necessary condition for changes in phonological
processing to be observed. That said, this outcome does not rule
out the possibility that skilled readers can exploit orthographic
overlap at the level of rimes across conditions to generate a
phonological code.

Experiment 3
In Experiment 1, and, to a lesser degree, Experiment 2, the
nonwords were inconsistent (e.g., Glushko, 1979; Jared, 1997).
Inconsistent nonwords are those for which there are alternative
pronunciations for the rime (e.g., the rime in zint can be assigned
the pronunciation
as in pint or the pronunciation /Int/ as in
hint). It is therefore possible that participants are adapting how
they generate a phonological code on a trial-by-trial basis in
response to ambiguity in the pronunciations of these nonwords.
According to such an account, it is not that a particular pathway is
required to read an item correctly that leads skilled readers to adapt
how they generate a phonological code, but rather it is the ambiguous lexical contribution to phonology.
If the changes in phonological processing observed in Experiments 1 and 2 were due to nonword consistency, then the switch
costs should be eliminated if the nonwords are consistent (as well
as not sharing rimes with the exception words). In contrast, if the
changes in how a phonological code is computed arise as predicted
by the pathway control hypothesis, then switch costs will still be
observed.

Method
Table 2
Mean Response Time (RT) and Percentage Error (PE) for HighFrequency Exception Words and Nonwords as a Function of
Switch and Stay Trials in Experiment 2
High-frequency
exception words

Nonwords

Trial

RT

PE

RT

PE

Switch
Stay
Difference

504
484
20

1.0
2.0
⫺1.0

563
550
13

8.0
7.5
0.5

Note. Thirty-seven percent of the unique orthographic bodies in the
exception words are repeated in the nonwords. RTs are in milliseconds.

Participants. Sixteen undergraduate students from the University of Waterloo were each paid $4.00 to participate in the present
experiment. All individuals had normal or corrected-to-normal
vision and were native English speakers.
Stimuli. Experiment 3 used the 50 exception words from Experiments 1 and 2 and a new set of 50 consistent nonwords (see
Appendix C). None of the unique orthographic bodies from the
exception words were repeated in the nonwords.
Apparatus and procedure. The apparatus and procedure were
the same as those used in Experiments 1 and 2.

Results
Trials on which there was an incorrect pronunciation (3.3%) or
a voice-key failure (2.6%) were removed prior to the RT analysis;

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

CONTEXT EFFECTS

1.9% of the correct RT data were removed due to the trimming
procedure. Correct RT and PE can be seen in Table 3.
RT. The exception words were read aloud faster than were the
nonwords, F1(1, 15) ⫽ 18.9, p ⬍ .001, MSE ⫽ 6,055, ␩2 ⫽ .55;
F2(1, 98) ⫽ 106.2, p ⬍ .001, MSE ⫽ 0.273, ␩2 ⫽ .52, and there
was a significant switch cost, F1(1, 15) ⫽ 7.6, p ⬍ .001, MSE ⫽
469, ␩2 ⫽ .35; F2(1, 98) ⫽ 10.9, p ⬍ .001, MSE ⫽ .128, ␩2 ⫽ .10.
There was no interaction between stimulus type and switch condition (F1 ⬍ 1, ␩2 ⬍ .01; F2 ⬍ 1, ␩2 ⬍ .01).
PE. More errors were made to nonwords than to words, F1(1,
15) ⫽ 17.3, p ⬍ .001, MSE ⫽ 10.5, ␩2 ⫽ .54; F2(1, 98) ⫽ 14.5,
p ⬍ .001, MSE ⫽ 51, ␩2 ⫽ .12. There was no switch cost (F1 ⬍
1, ␩2 ⬍ .01; F2 ⬍ 1, ␩2 ⬍ .01), nor was there an interaction
between stimulus type and switch condition, F1(1, 15) ⫽ 1.2, ␩2 ⫽
.08; F2(1, 98) ⫽ 2.2, p ⬎ .10, MSE ⫽ 46.1, ␩2 ⫽ .02.

Discussion
Once again, statistically symmetric switch costs were observed
despite the use of consistent nonwords that did not share rimes
with the exception words. This outcome is consistent with skilled
readers changing how they generate a phonological code as predicted by the pathway control hypothesis. The observation of
switch costs in the present experiment also reinforces the conclusion that orthographic overlap or phonological discordance between the exception words and nonwords was not the cause of the
switch costs observed in Experiment 1, nor in Reynolds and
Besner’s (2005b) work. It also suggests that ambiguity in the
pronunciation of the nonwords (as defined by consistency at the
level of the nonword body) is not a necessary condition for
trial-by-trial control to be observed.

Summary: Experiments 1–3
Experiments 1–3 examined whether skilled readers change how
they read as predicted by the pathway control hypothesis. According to this account, skilled readers will emphasize the lexical
pathway when reading exception words aloud because it is required to generate a correct pronunciation and will emphasize the
nonlexical pathway when reading nonwords aloud because it is
required to generate a correct pronunciation.
There are now four demonstrations (Experiments 1–3 reported
here and the experiment reported by Reynolds & Besner, 2005b)
that skilled readers do change how they generate a phonological
Table 3
Mean Response Time (RT) and Percentage Error (PE) for HighFrequency Exception Words and Nonwords as a Function of
Switch and Stay Trials in Experiment 3
High-frequency
exception words

Nonwords

Trial

RT

PE

RT

PE

Switch
Stay
Difference

531
516
15

2.3
1.0
1.3

613
599
14

4.8
5.3
⫺0.5

Note. None of the unique orthographic bodies in the exception words are
repeated in the nonwords. RTs are in milliseconds.

55

code from print when reading aloud exception words and nonwords in a predictable sequence. Pathway emphasis (defined here
by the presence of a switch cost) occurs (a) regardless of how
frequently the exception words are encountered in print, (b) regardless of the orthographic overlap between the exception words
and nonwords, and (c) regardless of the consistency of the nonwords. The pathway control hypothesis therefore provides a good
account of these data.

Part 2: Experiment-wide Control
The data from Experiments 1–3 and those reported by Reynolds
and Benser (2005b) can be accounted for by a straightforward
version of the pathway control hypothesis in which a pathway will
only be emphasized if it is required to generate a correct pronunciation. This simple version of the pathway control hypothesis
predicts that a trial-by-trial control over how a phonological code
is generated will only be observed if the stimuli being read aloud
require different pathways for correct pronunciation (e.g., exception words and nonwords). In contrast, if one set of stimuli requires
the use of a particular pathway and the other set of stimuli does not
require the use of a different pathway, then no switch cost need be
observed.
According to the DRC model, regular words differ from exception words and nonwords in that a correct phonological code can
be generated by both the lexical pathway and the nonlexical
pathway. Therefore, if participants read aloud regular words and
exception words in a predictable sequence, then the presence of
exception words should result in the regular words being read
aloud with the lexical pathway emphasized. If participants read
aloud regular words and nonwords in a predictable sequence, then
the presence of nonwords should result in the regular words being
read aloud with the nonlexical pathway emphasized. A switch cost
would therefore not be expected in either of these cases.

Experiment 4
Exception words and regular words were read aloud together in
Experiment 4. If the lexical pathway can be emphasized throughout the experiment, then an effect of switching between stimuli
need not be observed.

Method
Participants. Sixteen undergraduate students from the University of Waterloo were each paid $4.00 to participate in the present
experiment. All individuals had normal or corrected-to-normal
vision and were native English speakers.
Stimuli. Experiment 4 used 48 exception words and 48 regular
words (see Appendix D). Approximately 75% of the exception
words were used in Experiments 1–3. The stimuli for both types of
words were selected from the entire frequency spectrum. However,
the mean frequency of the exception words (M ⫽ 268 counts per
million) was significantly higher than that of the regular words
(M ⫽ 47 counts per million), t(94) ⫽ 3.7, p ⬍ .001. An advantage
of this difference in word frequency is that it is possible to produce
a main effect of word type in the context of an experiment in which
a null switch cost is expected, rather than report an experiment in
which there are no significant effects at all. Similar to Experiment

REYNOLDS AND BESNER

56

1, 85% of the unique orthographic bodies from the exception
words were repeated in the regular words.
Apparatus and procedure. The apparatus and procedure were
the same as those used in Experiments 1–3.

Table 5
Mean Response Time (RT) and Percentage Error (PE) for
Regular Words and Nonwords as a Function of Switch and Stay
Trials in Experiment 5
Regular words

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Results
Trials on which there was an incorrect pronunciation (4.7%) or
a voice-key failure (4.9%) were removed prior to the RT analysis;
2.4% of the correct RT data were removed due to the trimming
procedure. Correct RT and PE can be seen in Table 4.
RT. As expected, the higher frequency exception words were
read aloud faster than were the lower frequency regular words,
F1(1, 15) ⫽ 40.9, p ⬍ .001, MSE ⫽ 619, ␩2 ⫽ .732; F2(1, 94) ⫽
19.7, p ⬍ .001, MSE ⫽ .432, ␩2 ⫽ .174. There was no cost of
switching between regular and exception words (F1 ⬍ 1, ␩2 ⫽
.001; F2 ⬍ 1, ␩2 ⫽ .002), nor was there an interaction between
stimulus type and switch condition (F1 ⬍ 1, ␩2 ⫽ .027; F2 ⫽ 1.1,
␩2 ⫽ .012).
PE. No effects approached significance in the error data (Fs ⬍
1.4).

Discussion
A switch cost was not observed in Experiment 4, consistent with
the claim that both the exception words and the regular words were
read aloud by emphasizing the lexical pathway throughout the
experiment.

Experiment 5
The regular words from Experiment 4 were read together with a
set of nonwords. If the nonlexical pathway can be emphasized
throughout the experiment, then a switch cost need not be observed
here.

Method
Participants. Sixteen undergraduate students from the University of Waterloo were each paid $4.00 to participate in the present
experiment. All individuals had normal or corrected-to-normal
vision and were native English speakers.
Stimuli. Experiment 5 used the 48 regular words (from Experiment 4) and 48 nonwords (see Appendix E). Similar to Experi-

Table 4
Mean Response Time (RT) and Percentage Error (PE) for HighFrequency Exception Words and Regular Words as a Function
of Switch and Stay Trials in Experiment 4
High-frequency
exception words

Regular words

Trial

RT

PE

RT

PE

Switch
Stay
Difference

517
512
5

5.6
3.2
2.4

553
557
⫺4

5.4
6.0
⫺0.6

Note. Eighty-five percent of the unique orthographic bodies in the exception words are repeated in the regular words. RTs are in milliseconds.

Nonwords

Trial

RT

PE

RT

PE

Switch
Stay
Difference

543
536
7

2.2
3.6
⫺1.4

614
618
⫺5

10.8
9.4
1.4

Note. Eighty-two percent of the unique orthographic bodies in the regular
words are repeated in the nonwords. RTs are in milliseconds.

ments 1 and 4, 82% of the unique orthographic bodies from the
exception words were repeated in the nonwords.
Apparatus and procedure. The apparatus and procedure were
the same as those used in Experiments 1– 4.

Results
Trials on which there was an incorrect pronunciation (6.1%) or
a voice-key failure (5.5%) were removed prior to the RT analysis;
1.8% of the correct RT data were removed due to the data trimming procedure. Correct RT and PE can be seen in Table 5.
RT. The regular words were read aloud faster than were the
nonwords, F1(1, 15) ⫽ 30.5, p ⬍ .001, MSE ⫽ 3,070, ␩2 ⫽ .670;
F2(1, 94) ⫽ 58.0, p ⬍ .001, MSE ⫽ 6,191, ␩2 ⫽ .400. There was
no significant switch cost (F1 ⬍ 1, ␩2 ⫽ .002; F2 ⬍ 1, ␩2 ⬍ .001),
nor was there an interaction between stimulus type and switch
condition, F1 ⬍ 1, ␩2 ⫽ .015; F2(1, 94) ⫽ 1.9, p ⬎ .10, MSE ⫽
2,115, ␩2 ⫽ .02.
PE. More errors were made to nonwords than to words, F1(1,
15) ⫽ 16.9, p ⬍ .001, MSE ⫽ 49.1, ␩2 ⫽ .529; F2(1, 94) ⫽ 11.5,
p ⬍ .001, MSE ⫽ 200, ␩2 ⫽ .111. There was no switch cost (F1 ⬍
1, ␩2 ⬍ .001; F2 ⬍ 1, ␩2 ⬍ .001), nor was there an interaction
between stimulus type and switch condition, F1(1, 15) ⫽ 1.2, p ⬎
.15, MSE ⫽ 23.7, ␩2 ⫽ .077; F2(1, 94) ⫽ 2.5, p ⬎ .10, MSE ⫽
45.9, ␩2 ⫽ .026.

Discussion
No significant main effect of switching stimulus categories was
observed in Experiment 5 (1 ms), consistent with participants
using a single experiment-wide set for generating a phonological
code. Although there was a nonsignificant 7-ms switch cost for the
regular words, this coincided with a decrease in errors on the
switch trials. Thus, despite a switch cost when exception words
and nonwords were intermixed in Experiments 1–3, no switch cost
was observed when exception words and regular words were
mixed together (Experiment 4) or when nonwords and regular
words were mixed together (Experiment 5). This suggests that the
regular words in Experiment 4 were read with an experiment-wide
emphasis on the lexical pathway, whereas the same set of words in
Experiment 5 was read with an experiment-wide emphasis on the
nonlexical pathway.

The Effect of Word Frequency
To further assess whether the regular words were being read
with the lexical pathway emphasized in Experiment 4 and with the

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

CONTEXT EFFECTS

nonlexical pathway emphasized in Experiment 5, we also examined whether the effect of word frequency changed size for the
regular words between experiments. The expectation is that the
effect of word frequency should be larger for the regular words in
Experiment 4 than in Experiment 5 because in the former case, the
lexical pathway is emphasized, whereas in the latter case, the
nonlexical pathway is emphasized.
As noted above, the regular words were selected from the entire
frequency spectrum. The effect of word frequency was therefore
examined by calculating the slope relating log10[(word frequency
/ million) ⫹1] and RT separately for each participant. These slopes
were then analyzed using a mixed-model ANOVA with switch
condition as the repeated factor and experiment as the independent
factor. An average slope of zero would imply that there is no effect
of word frequency. As can be seen Table 6, there was a significant
frequency effect in both Experiment 4, F(1, 15) ⫽ 40.0, p ⬍ .001,
MSE ⫽ 1,041, and Experiment 5, F(1, 15) ⫽ 7.0, p ⬍ .05, MSE ⫽
493. However, further analysis revealed a significant effect of
experiment, F(1, 30) ⫽ 13.3, p ⬍ .001, MSE ⫽ 767, indicating that
the effect of word frequency was larger in Experiment 4 (⫺36 ms
/ log10[frequency]) compared with Experiment 5 (⫺10 ms /
log10[frequency]). No other effects approached significance (Fs ⬍
1). Consistent with the pathway control hypothesis, this outcome
implies that there was a larger contribution from the lexical route
when the regular words were read with exception words compared
with when they were read with nonwords.

Part 3: Exogenous and/or Endogenous Control
The switch costs observed in the present studies indicate that the
processes responsible for generating a phonological code from
print are dynamic, but they do not inform us about the control
processes responsible for implementing these changes. Fortunately, some insight into these control processes can be gained by
considering accounts of residual switch costs in the task-switching
literature. A common finding in such experiments is that a residual
switch cost is observed despite sufficient time to prepare for the
new task (e.g., 2,250 ms, as in the present studies). One account of
this cost is that it reflects exogenous control driven by the presentation of the task-relevant stimulus. For instance, Rogers and
Monsell (1995; see also Monsell, 2003) have suggested that residual switch costs index the time taken for an exogenous component of the task-set reconfiguration process, and Allport et al.
(1994) have suggested that the residual switch cost is due to
passive carryover from the inappropriate task set. Critically, both
of these accounts of the residual switch costs suggest that processing changes are not finalized until after the stimulus is presented.
An alternative account is that the residual switch cost is due to

Table 6
Mean Slope Relating RT (in Milliseconds) to log10 (Word
Frequency) for Regular Words as a Function of Switch and Stay
for Experiments 4 and 5
Experiment
4
5
Difference

Switch

Stay

⫺34
⫺10
⫺24

⫺37
⫺11
⫺26

57

endogenous control. For instance, De Jong (2000) suggested that
on a subset of trials participants wait until the stimulus appears to
implement the necessary changes. According to this account, the
residual switch cost arises not because reconfiguration requires an
external stimulus for completion, but rather because people sometimes fail to engage the new task set prior to the stimulus.
Although a switch cost, by itself, does not discriminate between
exogenous and endogenous control, the pattern of switch costs
across experiments is instructive. For instance, switch costs are
observed when exception words and nonwords are read aloud in
alternating sequence, irrespective of the words’ printed word frequency and across a number of different nonword contexts. If it is
the case that the parameter settings are always adjusted when
alternating between exception words and nonwords, then endogenous control operating on a trial-by-trial basis is not necessary to
explain these findings; exogenous control driven by the stimulus
itself would be sufficient to engage the appropriate parameter
changes.
A more formal approach to distinguishing between exogenous
and endogenous accounts of control in the task-switching literature
consists of examining the cumulative RT distributions for switch
and stay trials (De Jong, 2000; Nieuwenhuis & Monsell, 2002).
According to De Jong (2000), if the difference between switch and
stay trials is due to exogenous control linked to the presentation of
the stimulus, then the cumulative RT distributions for switch trials
will be shifted along the abscissas relative to the stay distribution
but both distributions should be identical in shape; in other words,
additive effects of switch condition across the cumulative RT
distribution. In contrast, if the difference between switch and stay
trials is due to endogenous control that is linked to the stimulus on
a subset of trials, then the response distribution for switch trials
will be composed of trials on which there was no change in
processing associated with the presentation of the stimulus and
trials on which the change in processing is tied to the presentation
of the stimulus. When the change in processing on switch trials is
linked to the presentation of the stimulus, RTs will be longer as
compared with when the change occurs prior to the stimulus
presentation. As a consequence, the fastest RTs will mostly consist
of switch trials on which there is no change in processing associated with the presentation of the stimulus, and the slowest RTs
mostly consist of trials on which the change is associated with the
presentation of the stimulus. As noted by De Jong, this predicts
that the switch and stay distributions should converge at fast RTs
and diverge at slow RTs. Thus, endogenous control predicts that
the cumulative RT distributions for switch and stay trials will
differ in shape; as RT increases, the difference between the distributions will increase. We use these predictions here to assess
whether the switch costs observed in the present experiments are
due to exogenous control, endogenous control, or both, depending
on the experiment.
The cumulative RT distributions for switch and stay trials were
calculated individually for each participant in Experiments 1–5,
collapsing across lexicality. The distributions were created by rank
ordering the correct RT in the switch and stay conditions and then
splitting the data into deciles (see De Jong, 2000). An average RT
was calculated for each decile for each participant.
The analysis of switch costs reported earlier suggests that (a) the
trial-by-trial control observed in Experiments 1–3 is due to exogenous control and (b) the trial-by-trial control is not occurring in

REYNOLDS AND BESNER

58

Experiments 4 and 5. The data from these experiments were
therefore analyzed separately. However, to improve power, Experiments 1–3 were analyzed together, as were Experiments 4 and 5.
The data were analyzed using a repeated-measures ANOVA with
switch and decile as factors. Given that endogenous control predicts that the difference between the switch and stay distributions
will increase with RT, only the linear component of the interaction
will be examined to increase power. The data can be seen in
Figure 2.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Experiments 1–3
The observation that switch costs are found across a range of
contexts is sufficiently explained by exogenous control. This account predicts that the cumulative response distributions for switch
and stay should be separated by a constant. Thus, exogenous
control predicts a main effect of switch condition and no interaction. As can be seen in the left panel of Figure 2, when exception
words and nonwords were read aloud in an alternating sequence in
Experiments 1–3, a 14-ms main effect of switch condition was
observed, F(1, 47) ⫽ 30.7, p ⬍ .001, MSE ⫽ 1,571. However,
there was no evidence of an interaction with decile, F(1, 47) ⬍ 1.
A sufficient account, therefore, is that the switch costs observed
when alternating between exception words and nonwords are due
to exogenous control.

Experiments 4 and 5
In Experiments 4 and 5, it was possible for a single experimentwide parameter set to be used. It was therefore hypothesized that

trial-by-trial control would not be observed. Consistent with this
prediction, a main effect of switch condition was not observed. If
trial by-trial control does not occur, then the cumulative RT
distributions for switch and stay trials should not differ. Such an
outcome would provide converging evidence for the claim that
trial-by-trial control was not occurring in these experiments. As
can be seen in the right panel of Figure 2, there was no effect of
switch condition and no interaction between switch condition and
decile (Fs ⬍ 1).

Summary
The RT distribution data are consistent with the central premise
of dual-route theory, namely that (a) the lexical pathway must
dominate performance for exception words to be read aloud correctly, (b) the nonlexical pathway must dominate performance for
nonwords to be read aloud correctly, and (c) regular words can be
read correctly with either the lexical pathway or the nonlexical
pathway dominating performance. The data are also compatible
with the pathway control hypothesis; when the stimuli require
different pathways to dominate, as is the case when alternating
between exception words (that require the lexical route) and nonwords (that require the nonlexical route), the appropriate pathway
is emphasized.
The RT distribution data are also consistent with the dynamics
of the reading system being controlled exogenously, linked to the
presentation of the target stimulus. At first blush, it may appear as
though it is necessary to invoke endogenous control to explain why
trial-by-trial control was observed in Experiments 1–3 but not in

Figure 2. Cumulative response time distributions (in milliseconds) for switch and stay trials for Experiments
1–3 (left) and Experiments 4 and 5 (right).

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

CONTEXT EFFECTS

Experiments 4 and 5. However, the data from all of the present
experiments can be explained by two simple context insensitive
rules: (a) If a stimulus (e.g., an exception word) is incompatible
with the nonlexical pathway (leaving aside the issue of how this is
computed), then emphasize the lexical route, and (b) if a stimulus
(e.g., a nonword) is incompatible with the lexical route (again
leaving aside the issue of how this is computed), then emphasize
the nonlexical route. Neither of these rules applies to regular
words, so these stimuli will not elicit a change in pathway emphasis. Consequently, when both rules are used in an experiment,
trial-by-trial control will be observed (e.g., Experiments 1–3). If
only one rule is used, then trial-by-trial control will not be observed (e.g., Experiments 4 and 5) because a single pathway will
be emphasized for both classes of stimuli (i.e., the lexical pathway
in Experiment 4 and the nonlexical pathway in Experiment 5). If
the rules that govern the dynamics of the reading system are
context insensitive, then the most efficient implementation is to
have the stimulus itself engage the appropriate parameter set (i.e.,
under exogenous control). This raises an important question for
future research: Is there a role for endogenous control over the
process of generating a phonological code?

Switch Costs: Reconfiguration or Interference?
The effect of predictable changes in lexicality as reported here
and by Reynolds and Besner (2005b) can be attributed to either the
time it takes to reconfigure the processing system online (reconfiguration cost) or to proactive interference from attempting to
read using a nonoptimal configuration from the previous trial.
According to the reconfiguration account, slower RTs are observed
on switch trials because reconfiguration of the reading system
finishes after the stimulus appears but before a response is made.
Here, the RT difference between switch and stay trials is a measure
of the time necessary to reconfigure the system to optimally read
a stimulus (e.g., Rogers & Monsell, 1995). One problem with this
account in the present context is that it is unclear what analysis of
the stimulus takes place online that would result in online reconfiguration and does not interact with the online computation of a
phonological code.
According to the proactive interference account, slower RTs are
observed on switch trials because the system parameters from the
previous trial are used (e.g., Allport et al., 1994). According to this
interpretation of a switch cost, the processing system is reconfigured after a stimulus is read using the inappropriate parameter
settings (e.g., because of the magnitude of the discrepancy between
the outputs of the two routes). Thus, on switch trials, an exception
word would be read using the parameters optimized for the previous nonword and vice versa. (Note that this does not imply that
the exception words will be regularized, only that the nonlexical
route will have a larger impact on switch trials compared with
stay trials.) Here, faster RTs for stay trials (A3 A, B3 B)
reflect a benefit from having successfully reconfigured the
processing system.
Although the present studies do not address whether differences
in RT between switch and stay trials are a consequence of reconfiguration time or proactive interference, one can imagine an
experiment that does. For instance, a powerful test of the proactive
interference account would come from a within-subjects comparison of the effect of a psycholinguistic variable (e.g., word fre-

59

quency) across switch and stay trials. Consider an experiment in
which participants read aloud exception words that vary on word
frequency and nonwords in an AABB sequence. If the switch cost
arises because the system parameters from the previous trial are
being used, then this implies that the exception words are being
read with the nonlexical pathway emphasized on switch trials and
with the lexical pathway emphasized on stay trials. This suggests
that the effect of word frequency should be smaller for exception
words on switch trials as compared with stay trials in the context
of an experiment that produces a main effect of switch condition.
In contrast, we see no reason for the online reconfiguration account
to predict any change in the size of the word frequency effect
across switch and stay trials.
Additional insight may come from comparing the pronunciations made with items on switch and stay trials. Variability in the
pronunciations assigned to nonwords has been used to make inferences about the underlying structure of the reading system (e.g.,
Andrews & Scarrett, 1998). Similarly, some of the earliest evidence for the pathway control hypothesis comes from errors made
during reading aloud (Midgley-West, 1979; Monsell et al., 1992).
In the present context, such an analysis could provide important
insight into the dynamic structure of the reading system while
simultaneously providing evidence for the interference account.
For example, if an irregular pronunciation of a nonword (e.g., zint
read so as to rhyme with pint) is more likely on a switch trial
compared with a stay trial, then this would provide compelling
evidence that the contribution from the lexical pathway is changing across switch and stay trials. Unfortunately, such an analysis is
impossible with the present studies because we did not record
participants’ pronunciations.

Control and Optimization
A core assumption of the pathway control hypothesis is that
changes are made to the reading system to optimize the reading
process. An important question, then, is how to assess whether the
reading system is being optimized under conditions where trialby-trial control is observed, such as Experiments 1–3. If one
considers the stay trials to be an appropriate baseline for optimized
performance, then slower responses on switch trials represent a
failure of the system to optimize performance. Similarly, if the
switch trial is viewed as an appropriate baseline, then the benefit
from the optimization process is quite small (14 ms, on average, in
Experiments 1–3), implying that the optimization process is inefficient. Although both baselines suggest that the reading system is
attempting to optimize performance, their validity remains to be
verified. Indeed, there are at least two other baselines that will
likely provide more appropriate insight into the optimization of the
reading process and the true costs of control.
To assess whether trial-by-trial changes in parameter values
optimize performance when two intermixed classes of stimuli
(e.g., exception words and nonwords) appear in a predictable
alternating sequence (as in the present studies), performance
should to be compared with a baseline in which the same stimuli
are randomly intermixed. Faster overall RTs in the alternating runs
condition would suggest that performance is being optimized. This
is clearly a useful direction for future research.
Additional insight into the nature of the control processes and
their costs can be gained by comparing performance in an alter-

REYNOLDS AND BESNER

60

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

nating runs context with a baseline condition in which participants
read aloud a single class of items. Evidence from the taskswitching literature suggests that task performance is substantially
slower on stay trials in an alternating runs context compared with
when only a single task is performed. This cost is often attributed
to having to maintain two task sets in memory (see Monsell, 2003;
Pashler, 2000). Switching between tasks, however, requires a
greater number of parameter changes than switching between
stimuli when the task and script remain the same. It remains to be
seen whether similar performance differences will be observed
when alternating between different stimulus categories, as in the
present studies.

General Discussion
According to the basic version of the pathway control hypothesis considered here, (a) there are two pathways for generating a
phonological code from print and (b) changes to the relative
emphasis of these pathways arise when a specific pathway is
required to generate a correct pronunciation. In this account,
exception words require the lexical pathway to generate a correct
pronunciation, nonwords require the nonlexical pathway to generate a correct pronunciation, and a correct pronunciation can be
generated by either pathway for regular words.
The results of the present experiments are consistent with this
simple version of the pathway control hypothesis. In Experiments
1–3, the process of generating a phonological code changed as a
function of stimulus category (exception words vs. nonwords)
when the stimuli required different pathways. Furthermore, these
changes in pathway emphasis appear to be initiated by an exogenous control process time linked to the onset of the stimulus.
Within Experiments 4 and 5, the process of generating a phonological code did not change as a function of stimulus category but
it did change across experiments. This result suggests that both
classes of items were read using a single parameter set in which a
particular pathway is emphasized.

RT Homogenization
The results of the present experiments also suggest that contextual changes in reading performance are not solely a consequence
of RT homogenization, in contrast to the conclusion offered by
Lupker et al. (1997; Kinoshita & Lupker, 2003; Taylor & Lupker,
2001). According to RT homogenization, the point in time for
responding is adjusted on a trial-by-trial basis based on the relative
speed of the previous trial. This account therefore predicts that
there should be a cost when switching from a slow item to a fast
item but a benefit when switching from a fast item to a slow item
because the time criterion is set earlier following a fast trial and
later following a slow trial. This pattern was not reliably observed
in any of the experiments reported here.
Although the pattern predicted by RT homogenization was not
reliably observed in any single experiment, there was a nonsignificant trend for the switch costs to be smaller when switching from
a fast item to a slow item compared with when switching from a
slow item to a fast item in each of the experiments. This is
consistent with RT homogenization having a small but consistent
effect on overall performance in addition to the changes in pathway emphasis.

The absence of a reliable pattern of RT homogenization in any
one particular experiment may be due to the predictive nature of
the present context. The predictable alternating pattern contained
reliable information about the difficulty of the current item being
read. The presence of this information may have allowed skilled
readers to use one of two approaches. They may have simply
reduced their reliance on a time criterion for responding. Alternatively, the time criterion may have been predominantly based on
the time it took to read aloud a previous item at that position of the
alternating sequence.

Lexical Checking
Lexical checking refers to the process of consulting the phonological output lexicon for a lexical entry that matches a phonological code (Kinoshita & Lupker, 2003; Lupker et al., 1997). According to Kinoshita and Lupker (2003), lexical checking is an
extra process that occurs after a phonological code has been
computed. It is argued to be beneficial when reading words—it
may yield a small time cost, but responses will be more accurate.
In contrast, lexical checking is argued to be counterproductive in
the case of nonwords because of how long it takes to conduct an
unsuccessful check of the lexicon (Kinoshita & Lupker, 2003).3
It is possible to explain the observation of a switch cost when
fast words and slow nonwords are read aloud together, as in
Experiments 1–3, by combining RT homogenization and lexical
checking. According to this account, the switch cost for fast words
following slow nonwords is a consequence of RT homogenization.
The switch cost for slow items can be attributed to lexical checking
if it is assumed that participants are likely to accidentally conduct
a lexical check on the first nonword trial (Reynolds & Besner,
2005b).
One problem with this account is that lexical checking has only
been invoked to account for an increase in the time to read aloud
nonwords when intermixed with low-frequency exception words
compared with the time it takes to read aloud nonwords in a pure
block of trials. This increase in the time to read aloud nonwords is
typically not seen when nonwords are mixed with high-frequency
exception words (e.g., Kinoshita & Lupker, 2003, Experiments 1
and 2). Thus, it is unclear why lexical checking would be invoked
in the present experiments, given that they do not contain any
low-frequency exception words.
To provide a viable account of the present data then, the RT
homogenization–lexical checking account needs to further articulate the contextual factors that determine when these processes will
occur. This account will need to explain why there was no reliable
effect of RT homogenization in any of the present experiments,
why lexical checking did not occur in Experiment 5, and why it
would have occurred when high-frequency exception words were
used in contrast with previous findings.

Future Directions
Although the present studies suggest that the process of generating a phonological code can change across contexts, more re3

Initially, Lupker et al. (1997) postulated that lexical checking can take
place while a phonological code is being generated. According to this
account, lexical checking slows responses to nonwords because it interferes
with the process of generating a phonological code to such items.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

CONTEXT EFFECTS

search is needed to understand the range of conditions that can lead
to such changes. For instance, the primary focus of the present
studies was changes that arise because of the compatibility of
stimuli with the lexical and nonlexical pathways as predicted by
the pathway control hypothesis operating in the context of a
localist dual-route model with a nonlexical route that uses grapheme to phoneme correspondences. This raises two areas for future
research. First, do the reading system parameters change in response to other factors, such as orthographic overlap or consistency? The data from Experiments 2 and 3 suggest that these are
not necessary conditions for control, but this does not rule out the
possibility that they are sufficient for processing changes to take
place. Second, examining the conditions in which control is observed may allow us to discriminate between different models. For
instance, the nonlexical pathway in Perry et al.’s (2007) CDP⫹
can read exception words with consistent bodies nonlexically. As
a consequence, the pathway control hypothesis operating in the
context of this model predicts that consistent exception words and
nonwords can be read by using a single experiment-wide set in
which the nonlexical route is emphasized.

Conclusions
The results of the present experiments are inconsistent with
models of reading aloud that explain performance as automatic in
Underwood’s (1978) sense of being structurally determined. Instead, the present results suggest that how a phonological code is
generated changes across contexts in response to the changing
demands placed on it by different stimuli (here, exception words
and nonwords). Most generally, the present results (a) broaden the
empirical support for the claim that skilled readers are able to exert
at least some control over how they generate a phonological code,
(b) delineate some of the conditions that lead to changes in reading
style on a trial-by-trial basis or use a single experiment-wide set,
and (c) provide evidence for the operation of exogenous control
processes.

References
Allport, A., Styles, E. A., & Hsieh, S. (1994). Shifting intentional set:
Exploring the dynamic control of tasks. In C. Umilta & M. Moscovitch
(Eds.), Attention and performance XV: Conscious and nonconscious
information processing (pp. 421– 452). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Allport, A., & Wylie, G. (2000). Task-switching, stimulus–response bindings and negative priming. In S. Monsell & J. Driver (Eds.), Attention
and performance XVIII: Control of cognitive processes (pp. 35–70).
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Andrews, S., & Scarrett, D. R. (1998). Rule and analogy mechanisms in
reading nonwords: Hough dou peapel rede gnew wirds? Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 24,
1052–1086.
Baayen, R. H., Piepenbrock, R., & van Rijn, H. (1993). The CELEX lexical
database (CD-ROM). Philadelphia, PA: Linguistic Data Consortium,
University of Pennsylvania.
Balota, D. A., & Yap, M. J. (2006). Attentional control and the flexible
lexical processor: Explorations of the magical moment of word recognition. In S. Andrews (Ed.), From inkmarks to ideas (pp. 229 –258).
Hove, England: Psychology Press.
Baluch, B., & Besner, D. (1991). Visual word recognition: Evidence for
strategic control of lexical and nonlexical routines in oral reading.

61

Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 17, 644 – 652.
Chateau, D., & Lupker, S. J. (2003). Strategic effects in word naming:
Examining the route-emphasis versus time-criterion accounts. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 29,
139 –151.
Coltheart, M., & Rastle, K. (1994). Serial processing in reading aloud:
Evidence for dual-route models of reading. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 20, 1197–1211.
Coltheart, M., Rastle, K., Perry, C., Langdon, R., & Ziegler, J. (2001).
DRC: A dual route cascaded model of visual word recognition and
reading aloud. Psychological Review, 108, 204 –256.
De Jong, R. (2000). An intention-activation account of residual switch
costs. In S. Monsell & J. Driver (Eds.), Attention and performance
XVIII: Control of cognitive processes (pp. 357–376). Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Glushko, R. J. (1979). The organization and activation of orthographic
knowledge in reading aloud. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 5, 674 – 691.
Havelka, J., & Rastle, K. (2005). The assembly of phonology from print is
serial and subject to strategic control: Evidence from Serbian. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 31, 148 –
158.
Jared, D. (1997). Spelling–sound consistency affects the naming time of
high frequency words. Journal of Memory and Language, 36, 505–529.
Kello, C. T., & Plaut, D. C. (2003). Strategic control over rate of processing in word reading: A computational investigation. Journal of Memory
and Language, 48, 207–232.
Kinoshita, S., & Lupker, S. J. (2002). Effects of filler type in naming:
Change in time criterion or attentional control of pathways? Memory &
Cognition, 30, 1277–1287.
Kinoshita, S., & Lupker, S. J. (2003). Priming and attentional control of
lexical and sublexical pathways in naming: A re-evaluation. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 29, 405–
415.
Lupker, S. J., Brown, P., & Colombo, L. (1997). Strategic control in a
naming task: Changing routes or changing deadlines? Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning Memory, and Cognition, 23, 570 –590.
McCann, R. S., Remington, R. W., & Van Selst, M. (2000). A dual-task
investigation of automaticity in visual word recognition. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 26,
1352–1370.
Midgley-West, L. (1979). Strategies in reading. Unpublished doctoral
dissertation, Birkbeck College, London.
Monsell, S. (2003). Task switching. Trends in Cognitive Science, 7, 134–
140.
Monsell, S., Patterson, K. E., Graham, A., Hughes, C. H., & Milroy, R.
(1992). Lexical and sublexical translation of spelling to sound: Strategic
anticipation of lexical status. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 18, 452– 467.
Morton, J. (1969). Interaction of information in word recognition. Psychological Review, 76, 165–178.
Nieuwenhuis, S., & Monsell, S. (2002). Residual costs in task switching:
Testing the failure-to-engage hypothesis. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 9, 86 –92.
Pashler, H. (2000). Task switching and multitask performance. In S.
Monsell & J. Driver (Eds.), Attention and performance XVIII: Control of
cognitive processes (pp. 277–307). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Perry, C., Ziegler, J. C., & Zorzi, M. (2007). Nested incremental modeling
in the development of computational theories: The CDP⫹ model of
reading aloud. Psychological Review, 114, 273–315.
Plaut, D. C., McClelland, J. L., Seidenberg, M. S., & Patterson, K. E.
(1996). Understanding normal and impaired word reading: Computa-

REYNOLDS AND BESNER

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

62

tional principles in quasi-regular domains. Psychological Review, 103,
56 –115.
Raman, I., Baluch, B., & Besner, D. (2004). On the control of visual word
recognition: Changing routes versus changing deadlines. Memory &
Cognition, 32, 489 –500.
Rastle, K., & Coltheart, M. (1999). Serial and strategic effects in reading
aloud. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance, 25, 482–503.
Reynolds, M., & Besner, D. (2002). Neighbourhood density effects in
reading aloud: New insights from simulations with the DRC model.
Canadian Journal of Experimental Psychology, 56, 310 –318.
Reynolds, M., & Besner, D. (2005a). Basic processes in reading: A
critical review of pseudohomophone effects in naming and a new
implemented computational account. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 12, 622– 646.
Reynolds, M., & Besner, D. (2005b). Contextual control over lexical and
sublexical routines when read English aloud. Psychonomic Bulletin &
Review, 12, 113–118.
Rogers, R. D., & Monsell, S. (1995). Costs of a predictable switch between
simple cognitive tasks. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General,
124, 207–231.
Schneider, W., Eschman, A., & Zuccolotto, A (2001). E-Prime User’s
Guide. Pittsburgh: Psychology Software Tools Inc.
Shafiullah, M., & Monsell, S. (1999). The cost of switching between Kanji
and Kana while reading Japanese. Language and Cognitive Processes,
14, 567– 607.
Tabossi, P., & Laghi, L. (1992). Semantic priming in the pronunciation of

words in two writing systems: Italian and English. Memory & Cognition,
20, 303–313.
Taylor, T. E., & Lupker, S. J. (2001). Sequential effects in naming: A
time-criterion account. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 27, 117–138.
Underwood, G. (1978). Concepts in information processing theory. In G.
Underwood (Ed.), Strategies of information processing (pp. 1–22). New
York: Academic Press.
Van Selst, M., & Jolicoeur, P. (1994). A solution to the effect of sample
size on outlier elimination. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 47a, 631– 650.
von Studnitz, R. E., & Green, D. W. (1997). Lexical decision and language
switching. The International Journal of Bilingualism, 1, 3–24.
Waszak, F., Hommel, B., & Allport, A. (2003). Task-switching and longterm priming: Role of episodic stimulus–task bindings in task-shift
costs. Cognitive Psychology, 46, 361– 413.
Waszak, F., Hommel, B., & Allport, A. (2004). Semantic generalization of
stimulus–task bindings. Psychonomic Bulleting & Review, 11, 1027–
1033.
Zevin, J. D., & Balota, D. A. (2000). Priming and attentional control of
lexical and sublexical pathways during naming. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 26, 121–135.
Zorzi, M., Houghton, G., & Butterworth, B. (1998). Two routes or one in
reading aloud? A connectionist dual-process model. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 24, 1131–
1161.

Appendix A
Stimuli From Experiment 1
Exception words
blood
break
change
cold
dead
doubt
give
good
have
health
heart
kind
known
lived
love
month
most

none
said
some
stood
told
want
were
wild
both
built
child
come
death
done
find
gone
growth

Nonwords
head
heard
hold
know
learn
lose
meant
mind
move
passed
show
spread
talk
truth
where
young

tood
heak
gange
brold
kead
soubt
mive
dood
mave
healt
deart
sind
lown
blived
nove
stonth
wost

wone
chaid
wome
knood
lold
gant
cere
hild
hoth
truilt
dild
chome
geath
whone
lind
sprone
howth

tead
meard
knold
fow
dearn
bose
greant
lind
bove
hassed
yow
shead
malk
muth
pere
coung

CONTEXT EFFECTS

63

Appendix B
Stimuli From Experiment 2

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Exception words
blood
both
break
built
calf
child
cold
come
death
done
doubt
dread
find
give
gone
good
growth

have
head
health
heard
heart
hold
kind
know
known
learn
lived
lose
love
meant
mind
month
most

Nonwords
move
none
said
shoe
show
some
spread
stood
talk
told
truth
want
war
were
where
wild

dall
vound
feath
keaf
jind
pive
tave
mouch
nove
keard
pome
pone
sull
tand
tood
sild
lut

yaze
zool
bint
bove
bross
daste
dreak
peaf
bieve
tive
dush
fash
hild
famp
jead
lutch
mant

neak
pook
pouth
plood
parp
tarm
tuss
doot
paunt
boof
zeat
beath
yose
breat
doot
gome

Appendix C
Stimuli From Experiment 3
Exception words
blood
both
break
built
calf
child
cold
come
death
done
doubt
dread
find
give
gone
good
growth

have
head
health
heard
heart
hold
kind
know
known
learn
lived
lose
love
meant
mind
month
most

Nonwords
move
none
said
shoe
show
some
spread
stood
talk
told
truth
want
war
were
where
wild

beal
dilt
doke
fice
jank
kag
gobe
moust
nuff
parl
pung
roud
sape
teap
titch
vack
wote

(Appendixes continue)

yeech
zoon
bink
broff
darge
dreap
peam
pilt
binch
deach
dobe
fust
hing
jark
lang
moop
nake

pern
pount
simp
tope
tunk
vout
warch
yean
zill
bope
beash
brean
gomp
peem
tife
drait

REYNOLDS AND BESNER

64

Appendix D
Stimuli From Experiment 4

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Exception words
blood
both
bowl
break
broad
child
come
cough
dead
death
dove
give
gone
good
grind
have

head
heard
heart
kind
know
known
learn
lived
lose
love
meant
mind
monk
month
most
move

Regular words
none
pint
plaid
said
shoe
show
some
spread
steak
stood
want
war
were
where
wild
wolf

bead
beard
bleak
bone
bonk
brow
care
chow
cloth
clown
cove
dive
dived
dome
dose
fears

fonts
food
gild
golf
goop
hear
here
hilt
hint
home
hove
laid
lead
lint
load
lost

mean
paid
plead
rant
save
sheath
sneak
sought
sphere
tar
tint
toe
tome
tone
wind
yowl

Appendix E
Stimuli From Experiment 5
Regular words
goop
bleak
tome
lead
dive
food
save
beard
lint
clown
dived
cove
fonts
lost
tone
laid

dome
sneak
rant
here
hilt
hint
yowl
bonk
cloth
load
gild
sheath
cove
bone
wind
bead

Nonwords
fears
chow
hear
dose
mean
tint
hove
home
brow
plead
golf
sphere
tar
paid
sought
toe

trood
kneak
bome
gead
mive
tood
mave
healt
nind
lown
bived
sove
conth
wost
wone
haid

wome
treak
gant
kere
hild
bint
powl
sonk
hoth
doad
trild
leath
tove
pone
shind
tead

meart
trow
dearn
mose
feant
lind
bove
bome
srow
chead
bolf
grere
yar
kaid
mought
scoe

Received January 12, 2007
Revision received July 27, 2007
Accepted August 2, 2007 䡲

