Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition
2008, Vol. 34, No. 1, 128 –145

Copyright 2008 by the American Psychological Association
0278-7393/08/$12.00 DOI: 10.1037/0278-7393.34.1.128

Multiple Roles for Time in Short-Term Memory: Evidence From Serial
Recall of Order and Timing
Simon Farrell
University of Bristol
Three experiments are reported that examine the relationship between short-term memory for time and
order information, and the more specific claim that order memory is driven by a timing signal.
Participants were presented with digits spaced irregularly in time and postcued (Experiments 1 and 2) or
precued (Experiment 3) to recall the order or timing of the digits. The primary results of interest were
as follows: (a) Instructing participants to group lists had similar effects on serial and timing recall in
inducing a pause in recall between suggested groups; (b) the timing of recall was predicted by the timing
of the input lists in both serial recall and timing recall; and (c) when the recall task was precued, there
was a tendency for temporally isolated items to be more accurately recalled than temporally crowded
items. The results place constraints on models of serial recall that assume a timing signal generates
positional representations and suggest an additional role for information about individual durations in
short-term memory.
Keywords: serial recall, timing, short-term memory, recall latencies, grouping

The purpose of this article is to consider the role of timing
information in short-term memory for both the order and timing
of sequences. Below, we consider the possibility that the same
principles apply to memory for time and memory for order, and
the stronger claim that memory for time and memory for order
rely on the same mechanisms or representations is discussed. To
examine this claim, we tested the following three predictions
from the involvement of a timing mechanism in serial recall
across three experiments: (a) Grouping should have effects of
recall of timing information, as well as order information, (b)
input timing should be reflected in output timing for recall of
both order and timing, and (c) temporally distinct items should
receive an ordered recall advantage. The accuracy and dynamics of recall from the experiments suggest that time is represented in both a timing signal and at the level of individual
durations, placing constraints on contemporary models of working memory.

How do we remember the temporal structure of sequences of
events? This question has concerned short-term memory researchers for a number of decades and has culminated in the
formulation of a number of models specifically dedicated to
explaining short-term memory for ordered sequences of information (Brown, Preece, & Hulme, 2000; Burgess & Hitch,
1999; Estes, 1972; Farrell & Lewandowsky, 2002; Page &
Norris, 1998). The interest in the principles underlying shortterm memory for order has been supplemented by a concern
with short-term memory for the timing of sequences (e.g.,
Collier & Logan, 2000; Farrell & McLaughlin, in press; Glenberg, Mann, Altman, Forman, & Procise, 1989; Watkins,
LeCompte, Elliott, & Fish, 1992). This interest in time as the
content of memories has been partly driven by the suggestion
that the positional representations underlying memory for serial
order have a general temporal basis (Brown et al., 2000; Burgess & Hitch, 1999; Glenberg & Swanson, 1986) and a more
general belief in the importance of studying time as an object of
memory (Crowder & Greene, 1987; Estes, 1985).

The Role of Time in Models of Short-Term Memory
A popular class of serial recall models assumes that items are
associated with some representation of position, such that a sequence can be recreated by cueing for items with successive
positional cues. In some these models (Brown, Neath, & Chater,
2007; Brown et al., 2000), time can be identified as playing a
fundamental role in the representation of position. For example, in
the OSCillator-based Associative Recall (OSCAR) model of
Brown et al. (2000), it is assumed that each stimulus in a sequence
is associated with the state of activation across a set of nodes
representing temporal context. This timing signal is assumed to
follow from the activity of neural oscillators—which have been
suggested to play a role in timing behavior (e.g., Treisman, Cook,
Naish, & MacCrone, 1994)—and gives a natural mechanism for
the reinstatement of the timing context for each position by “rewinding the clock” (Brown et al., 2000). In a more recent and

Portions of this work were presented at the Psychonomics Society
conference, Toronto, Ontario, Canada (November 2005) and the annual
meeting of the Experimental Psychology Society, Birmingham, United
Kingdom (April 2006). Running of Experiments 1 and 2 was supported by
British Academy Grant SG-38441, and Experiment 3 was supported by
Economic and Social Research Council Grant RES-062-23-0272. I thank
James Melhorn for recording the stimuli used in the experiments, and I also
thank Alex Bright-Paul, Fiona Laver, and Anna Lelièvre for running the
experiments. Anna Lelièvre’s assistance in running some analyses and
proofreading the article is also appreciated.
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Simon
Farrell, Department of Psychology, University of Bristol, 12a Priory
Road, Clifton, Bristol BS8 1TU, United Kingdom. E-mail:
Simon.Farrell@bristol.ac.uk
128

TIMING AND ORDER MEMORY

general time-based model, the Scale-Invariant Memory, Perception and LEarning (SIMPLE) model of Brown et al. (2007), the
primary assumption is that items being retrieved from memory are
discriminated on the basis of their temporal distance from the
present. As in the OSCAR model, time plays a key role in determining the recall of the ordering of items.1
These time-based models make a strong prediction that distinguishes them from models assuming ordinal representations of
position (e.g., Farrell & Lewandowsky, 2002): Items that are
spaced further apart in time (leading to less overlap in the temporal
contexts of the two items) are predicted to be less confusable in
order memory tasks. Contrary to this prediction, a number of
studies have failed to demonstrate any effects of the temporal
isolation of items, whether the information to be remembered is
auditory, visual, or spatial in nature; whether recall or recognition
is used as measure of memory; and regardless of the range of
temporal intervals used (Farrell & McLaughlin, in press; Lewandowsky & Brown, 2005; Lewandowsky, Brown, Wright, &
Nimmo, 2006; Nimmo & Lewandowsky, 2005, 2006; Parmentier,
King, & Dennis, 2006). There are two exceptions to this general
failure to observe a temporal isolation effect. One is the observation that extending the duration following an item can enhance
memory for that item (Lewandowsky & Brown, 2005). However,
this has been argued to follow from the employment of other
processes, such as rehearsal and consolidation, during these longer
intervals; thus, time may only be a proxy in determining the
application of time-dependent processes. Consistent with this is the
observation that requiring participants to remember items under
conditions of articulatory rehearsal negates these temporal isolation effects while leaving ordered recall relatively intact (Lewandowsky & Brown, 2005). A second form of evidence is less easily
explained away. In a recent set of experiments, Brown, Morin, and
Lewandowsky (2006) have observed that temporal isolation effects are observed in free recall and may also occur in ordered
recall tasks when the output order is left unconstrained, even when
participants cannot anticipate the nature of the memory test (Lewandowsky, Nimmo, & Brown, in press). On the basis of these
results, it has been argued that both ordinal and temporal information are encoded, with these different sources of information
being differentially weighted when retrieving items (Lewandowsky et al., in press). What is clear is that temporal information
does not solely drive the sequencing of information in short-term
order memory but appears to be encoded by default in short-term
order memory tasks.
Another set of studies has tested these models by examining the
accuracy and dynamics of the recall of list items under grouping
conditions. Imposing a grouped structure on lists (effectively forming “mini-lists”) has a number of effects on serial recall performance (see Ng & Maybery, 2002a, for a review). Overall order
recall accuracy is enhanced for grouped lists (e.g., Hitch, Burgess,
Towse, & Culpin, 1996; Maybery, Parmentier, & Jones, 2002;
Ryan, 1969a, 1969b), and grouping results in the appearance of
miniature serial position functions (i.e., multiple bowings in the
serial position function) corresponding to the groups (e.g., Hitch et
al., 1996; Maybery et al., 2002). Grouping also has a qualitative
effect on recall latencies: A pause is left in recall between groups,
leading to discontinuous peaks in the latency serial position function (Anderson & Matessa, 1997; Farrell & Lewandowsky, 2004;
Maybery et al., 2002; Parmentier, Andrés, Elford, & Jones, 2006).

129

Usually, this grouping is accomplished by separating the groups in
time (e.g., presenting a six-item list with the temporal structure 1..2..3. . . ..4..5..6; see Frick, 1989; Hitch et al., 1996; Maybery et al., 2002; Ryan, 1969a), which has led some to emphasize
the temporal nature of the grouping effect (Hitch et al., 1996). That
these grouping effects on accuracy and latency may also be obtained with other manipulations that leave the temporal organization of list items undisturbed—such as visual organization (Anderson & Matessa, 1997), playing auditory pips between groups
(Ryan, 1969a), and simply instructing participants to group the
lists without any stimulus manipulation (Ryan, 1969a)—indicates
that temporal variation is not critical to obtaining grouping effects.
Nevertheless, time-based theories, such as that of Brown et al.
(2000), specify that grouped lists are represented by a hierarchy of
temporal representations, with grouped lists recruiting an additional set of oscillators that repeat between groups. That is, these
models assume that one component of the timing signal represents
time in the sequence, and another represents time within each
group. This assumption was tested in experiments by Ng and
Maybery (2002a, 2005), who varied the timing of items within
temporally separated groups. The time-based models predict that
confusions of items between groups should occur on the basis of
the time of the occurrence of items within the group; that is, items
that occurred at the same time within their respective groups would
be more likely to be confused at recall than otherwise. Instead, Ng
and Maybery (2002a, 2005) observed that confusions between
groups occurred solely on the basis of shared in-group ordinal
position. Furthermore, Maybery et al. (2002) observed that the
dynamics of recall also failed to indicate a temporal synchronization between input and output: Although introducing a temporal
gap between items at input led to a pause being introduced between the groups at output, the size of this pause did not vary with
the size of the original temporal gap (see also Ng & Maybery,
2002b). Generally, these data have been argued to invalidate
temporal models of order memory and have instead been interpreted as evidence in favor of order-based theories (Ng & Maybery, 2005).
One attempt to resolve these findings with a belief in a primary
role for time in short-term memory is found in the SIMPLE model
of Brown et al. (2007). As mentioned, SIMPLE’s primary assumption is that items being retrieved from memory are discriminated
on the basis of their temporal distance from the present. An
1

One other model to which the label “time-based” has been applied is
the phonological loop model of Burgess and Hitch (1999)—a connectionist
version of the phonological loop model of Baddeley (1986). In this model,
it is assumed that each stimulus in a sequence is associated with the state
of activation across a set of nodes representing temporal context; as time
passes, a window of activation slides across the context nodes. Given that
Burgess and Hitch have identified the timing signal as being the output of
temporal oscillators as in the OSCAR models, some authors have justifiably identified this model as being time-based (e.g., Lewandowsky &
Brown, 2005; Lewandowsky et al., 2006). However, in a recent article,
Burgess and Hitch (2006) have stated that the “timing” signal was never
intended to be taken as time-based and that the intended assumption is that
the “ticking over” of the timing signal is driven by events rather than time.
We take Burgess and Hitch’s interpretation of the model but note the
implications of the results reported here for a time-based interpretation of
the model when appropriate.

130

FARRELL

assumption critical to explaining the above results is that the
relative weighting of the various dimensions along which items
might be discriminated is not fixed but can be set at retrieval
(Brown et al., 2007; Lewandowsky et al., in press). Together, these
assumptions allow the SIMPLE model to explain many of the
results above that appear problematic for a time-based model. The
lack of temporal isolation effects in serial recall are accounted for
by assuming that items are represented on both a temporal dimension and an ordinal dimension, with the ordinal dimension being
given primary weighting in standard serial recall, whereas the
temporal dimension may be more heavily weighted in cases in
which the order of output is unconstrained (Brown et al., 2006;
Lewandowsky et al., in press). To explain the null effect of varying
timing of items in groups (Ng & Maybery, 2002a, 2005), Brown et
al. (2007) assumed that items are discriminated along both a
temporal dimension representing time since occurrence and an
ordinal dimension representing the position of items in a group.
Although the flexibility to allocate weights to temporal and ordinal
dimensions gives the model additional freedom to account for
these effects, it is not clear under what situations the modeler can
a priori determine when participants will recruit one or the other
dimensions to guide responding. More germane to the issues here,
the nature of the temporal dimension and its relation to temporal
representations in other models and tasks are unclear, as Brown et
al. deliberately abstract from such a level of instantiation. We next
consider more direct approaches to the nature of temporal representations and how they might relate to sequence recall.

A Common Basis for Timing and Ordering in Short-Term
Memory?
The data reviewed in the previous section, in questioning the
necessary involvement of temporal information in ordered recall, are quite surprising given that a wealth of evidence indicates a critical relationship between timing behavior and shortterm or working memory (e.g., Fortin & Massé, 1999; Neath &
Fortin, 2005). Evidence for a specific relationship between
short-term memory for order and timing comes from a study by
Elvevåg, Brown, McCormack, Vousden, and Goldberg (2004),
who tested schizophrenia patients and controls on a probed
order recall task, a temporal estimation task, and a line length
estimation task. Elvevåg et al. found that, compared with controls, the patients with schizophrenia were impaired on the
order recall task and the temporal estimation task but were not
impaired on the line length estimation task. Elvevåg et al.
concluded that this pattern of impairment suggested a specific
dysfunction in the biopsychological mechanism(s) responsible
for the processing of temporal information. Henson, Hartley,
Burgess, Hitch, and Flude (2003) argued that these temporal
mechanisms might also be disrupted in experimental situations.
They showed that articulatory suppression, irrelevant speech,
and concurrent tapping all interfered with a short-term memory
task that placed demands on order memory to a greater extent
than one simply requiring the retention of the identity of list
items. Henson et al. suggested that their results were consistent
with the recruitment of a timing mechanism (or possibly more
than one) to enable the short-term ordering of sequences.
Recent work has also considered the extent to which serial order
memory might be related to processing and memory of the tem-

poral structure of whole sequences. A number of studies have
examined memory for the temporal schedule of items, with the
majority of these considering the hypothesis that the modality
effect in serial recall (e.g., Cowan, Saults, & Brown, 2004; Frankish, 1985) is due to a greater temporal resolution in the auditory
modality. Most studies failed to find an effect of modality for
timing tasks, or observed an auditory advantage only under specific conditions of rate of presentation, distractor activity, and
variability in the timing of stimuli (Collier & Logan, 2000; Glenberg & Jona, 1991; Watkins et al., 1992). A more direct investigation of the time– order relationship was conducted by Saito
(2001), who examined individual differences in a number of shortterm memory measures—including visual and auditory digit span,
and memory for rhythms (i.e., sequences of on– off beats). Saito
found that both visual and auditory digit span correlated with
rhythm recall performance, even when individual differences in
reading speed (a measure of articulatory speed) were accounted
for. Given that the relationship was observed for both auditory and
visual stimuli, Saito concluded that any common basis for timing
and ordering extended beyond auditory or articulatory processes
and was instead due to a shared reliance on a timing mechanism,
such as that assumed in Burgess and Hitch’s (1999) model.
Together, the evidence for the role of a timing mechanism in
short-term order memory, and the nature of a more general relationship between time and memory, is unclear. Although there is
some evidence against the specific formalism of the time– order
relationship in Brown et al.’s (2000) model (see also Burgess &
Hitch, 1999), further exploration of this relationship is warranted
in light of the positive evidence discussed and the abstract nature
of more general models of the role of time in order memory
(Brown et al., 2007). The remainder of this article reports three
experiments that examine the relationship between time and order
memory in a single task that manipulates memory requirements
(remembering order or timing) and otherwise equates experimental
details. In exploring this relationship, three questions are addressed:
1. Does grouping have a similar effect on timing recall and
order recall? In accounting for the well-replicated effects of
grouping on ordered recall, Henson, Burgess, and Frith (2000)
suggested that grouping has the effect of recruiting additional
timing mechanisms (e.g., some representation of rhythm; Saito,
2001) and additionally modulates the timing signal assumed to be
at play in ungrouped lists. On the assumption that recalling the
timing of a sequence also recruits this timing signal (see Farrell &
McLaughlin, in press; Saito, 2001), we expected that grouping
would similarly affect timing and order recall. In particular, given
that people leave an extended pause at group boundaries in serial
recall of grouped lists (Farrell & Lewandowsky, 2004; Maybery et
al., 2002), we predicted a pause to be left at group boundaries in
recalling the timing of grouped lists.
2. Does input timing drive output timing in timing and order
recall? Previous studies have demonstrated the ability of humans
to store, retain, and recall or recognize sequence timing (Collier &
Logan, 2000; Crowder & Greene, 1987; Farrell & McLaughlin, in
press; Ross & Houtsma, 1994). Accordingly, we expected that
participants would demonstrate some ability to reproduce the
timing of sequences in output when this was the task demand. Of
greater interest is the question of whether input timing is reflected
in the dynamics of serial recall. Although previous studies have

TIMING AND ORDER MEMORY

failed to demonstrate a mirroring of input times between groups in
recall of grouped lists (Maybery et al., 2002; Ng & Maybery,
2002b), this has not been studied more generally. One prediction
of timing signal models—such as OSCAR and Burgess and
Hitch’s (1999) model—is that, if the timing signal unfolds in
real-time (or a scaled version of real-time), input timing on a list
should predict output timing.
3. Does input timing affect ordered recall accuracy? In failing
to systematically demonstrate a temporal isolation effect in shortterm order memory, the studies reviewed earlier indicate a noncritical role of timing in ordered recall (e.g., Farrell & McLaughlin, in press; Lewandowsky et al., 2006). Nevertheless, a temporal
isolation effect is sometimes observed (Brown et al., 2006; Lewandowsky et al., in press), and the boundary conditions on this
effect are still unclear. The data collected here provide further
constraints on accounts of temporal isolation effects; on the basis
of the conclusions of Lewandowsky et al. (in press), we predicted
no temporal isolation effects for the serial recall tasks employed
here.

Experiment 1
To address the time– order relationship in a controlled design,
in Experiment 1 (and Experiment 2) we used the experimental
procedure schematically depicted in Figure 1 (cf. Farrell &
McLaughlin, in press). Participants were presented with lists of
six digits, the digits being presented with irregular timing. After
presentation of the list, participants were presented with a cue
indicating either (a) recall of the digits on the list in order
(“NUMBERS”) or (b) recall of the timing of the digits, disregarding the identity of the digits themselves (“RHYTHM”). Use
of this postcueing procedure meant that the two memory tasks
were equated both on the content of the lists and on the
processing of the lists at encoding, with the only possible
difference being the information recalled at output. The grouping of the lists was also manipulated by introducing grouping
instructions halfway through the experiment. As reviewed earlier, instructing participants to think about list items as being in
groups is sufficient to elicit grouping effects in serial recall
(Ryan, 1969a). Temporal grouping was not employed, as this

131

was thought to be a less salient grouping cue given the irregularity of list timing, and would provide a stronger test of the
grouping hypothesis: If grouping affects latencies in the absence of any objective timing manipulations, we can conclude
that the effects of grouping on latencies in either task are not
simply due to reading of the posited temporal dimension like a
tape (cf. Maybery et al., 2002).

Method
Participants and Design
Participants were 40 undergraduate students from the University
of Bristol, who participated in exchange for course credits. All
participants were native or fluent English speakers. Each participant completed trials in all cells of the 2 (task type: order vs.
timing) ⫻ 2 (instructions: ungrouped vs. grouped) ⫻ 6 (serial
position: 1– 6) design.

Materials and Apparatus
Lists contained six digits that were randomly sampled without replacement from the 1–9 set. Sixty lists were constructed
for each recall task and were subject to two constraints: (a)
Following Henson (1996), lists could not contain ascending or
descending pairs of integers (e.g., “3 4” or “7 6”), and (b) an
item could not appear in the same serial position on consecutive
lists. These constraints also applied to all remaining experiments.
We varied the presentation duration of each item on each list
pseudorandomly using the following procedure. First, a raw
duration was generated for each item by pseudorandomly sampling from a uniform distribution with lower and upper limits of
0 and 1. The durations on each list were then scaled such that
durations summed to a constant 3,000 ms; this equates to an
average presentation rate of two digits per second, similar to
other experiments requiring serial recall of visually presented
digits (e.g., Farrell & Lewandowsky, 2004). Any lists that
contained a presentation duration shorter than 200 ms were
entirely resampled, the resampling being repeated until the
constraints were satisfied. A histogram of the resulting interstimulus intervals (ISIs) across all participants and serial positions is shown in the left panel of Figure 2.
We controlled the experiment with a PC that presented all
stimuli (on a 15-in. [38.1 cm] monitor), and we collected and
scored all responses using the Psychophysics Toolbox for
MATLAB (Brainard, 1997; Pelli, 1997). The same apparatus
was used in the remaining experiments.

Procedure

Figure 1. A schematic depiction of the postcueing trial structure for
Experiments 1 and 2. See text for a complete description.

Participants were tested individually in a laboratory. Each
trial began with a fixation point (a cross) being presented in the
center of the screen for 1,000 ms. This was followed by a blank
screen with a duration of 500 ms, which was then followed by
presentation of the memory list. List items were presented one
by one on the screen, each item after the first immediately
replacing the preceding item and being presented for the time
determined by the pseudorandom sampling procedure described
above. Following presentation of the list, there was another

132

FARRELL

Figure 2. Histograms of the interstimulus intervals (ISIs) across all
participants and conditions for Experiment 1 (left panel) and Experiment 2
(right panel).

blank screen of 500 ms, followed by presentation of one of the
two cues “NUMBERS” and “RHYTHM.” If “NUMBERS” appeared on the screen, the participant’s task was to recall the
digits from the list in the order they were presented by typing
them on the numeric keypad of the keyboard (i.e., standard
serial recall). If the “RHYTHM” cue appeared, the participants
were instructed to ignore the identity of the digits, and instead
to tap the “5” key on the numeric keypad in time with the
remembered timing of the input list; that is, they should tap the
key at the remembered onset of each item. In effect, the timing
task required participants to reproduce the remembered durations of the items on the memory list in order. Demonstration
trials were given to show exactly what was required of the
participants in the timing task. The task cue remained on the
screen throughout the recall period. When the participant had
pressed six keys on the keypad, the cue was replaced by a blank
screen for 1,000 ms before moving on to the next trial.
For the first half of the experiment (60 lists: 30 order recalls and
30 timing recalls), the participants carried out the experiment in
line with the procedure as detailed. At the halfway point a message
appeared on the screen with additional instructions. These instructions were to “think about the six numbers on each list as being in

two groups of 3”; participants were given an example of such a
grouping (“For example, if you got the list of numbers ‘1 7 4 8 3
2,’ you would remember ‘1 7 4’ as one group, and ‘8 3 2’ as
another group”). The experimental task was otherwise unchanged.
The grouping instruction was presented in the second half of the
experiment for all participants. Although this leads to an order
confound, this constant ordering of conditions was chosen because
the grouping strategy was otherwise expected to continue after
people had been presented with grouped lists and thus contaminate
the ungrouped condition (Farrell & Lewandowsky, 2004; Henson,
1999).
Four practice trials were presented before the experimental
session began (two order trials and two timing trials) to familiarize
participants with the experiment. A self-paced break was presented
after every 10 experimental trials; participants were presented with
a message indicating that they should press the space bar to move
to the next set of trials. The entire procedure lasted for around 40
min.

Results
Results for all experiments reported here are structured according to the questions posed in the introduction. Within each section,
we consider the order task and the timing task in succession, with
the exception of the reporting of input– output timing relationships,
for which we consider the timing task first given the essential
nature of input– output timing for that task.

Ordering Accuracy
The left panel of Figure 3 plots the accuracy serial position
functions for the ungrouped and grouped conditions; we calculated
repeated measures error bars in this and all figures using the
methods reported in Bakeman and McArthur (1996). A 2 (instruction: ungrouped vs. grouped) ⫻ 6 (serial position) repeated measures analysis of variance (ANOVA) confirmed an apparent main
effect of grouping, with grouped lists being recalled more accurately than ungrouped lists (ungrouped M ⫽ 0.81; grouped M ⫽

Figure 3. Mean proportion correct ordered recall on the order task for ungrouped and grouped lists, plotted by
serial position for the three experiments.

TIMING AND ORDER MEMORY

133

Figure 4. Mean output times on the order task for ungrouped and grouped lists, plotted by serial position for
the three experiments.

0.88), F(1, 39) ⫽ 34.65, p ⬍ .001, ␩2p ⫽ .47,2 and a main effect of
serial position, F(1.97, 76.68) ⫽ 27.86, p ⬍ .001, ␩2p ⫽ .42,
reflecting the extended primacy and limited recency typical of
serial recall. A significant interaction was also observed, F(3.98,
155.26) ⫽ 5.89, p ⬍ .001, ␩2p ⫽ .13, confirming that the grouping
manipulation changed the shape of the serial position function.
Visual inspection of the functions in Figure 3 suggests “mini”
serial position curves corresponding to each group (Hitch et al.,
1996); however, there is some indication of spontaneous grouping
even in the ostensibly ungrouped lists (cf. Henson, 1996). An
analysis of repeated measures contrasts for this interaction revealed a quadratic trend relating serial position to the difference
between grouping conditions, F(1, 39) ⫽ 9.16, p ⫽ .004, ␩2p ⫽ .19,
in replication of previous grouping experiments involving lists of
verbal items (Maybery et al., 2002).

Output Timing Serial Position Functions
The left panel of Figure 4 plots the mean output time serial
position functions for the order task separately for the ungrouped
and grouped conditions. A 2 (instruction: ungrouped vs.
grouped) ⫻ 6 (serial position) ANOVA revealed that response
times were significantly longer in the ungrouped condition (ungrouped M ⫽ 658.2 ms; grouped M ⫽ 615.2 ms), F(1, 39) ⫽
18.75, p ⬍ .001, ␩2p ⫽ .36, and also indicated a main effect of
serial position, F(2.15, 83.77) ⫽ 299.00, p ⬍ .001, ␩2p ⫽ .86. The
majority of the latter effect came from noticeably longer latencies
for the item first recalled. This pattern is generally observed in
latency serial position functions (Anderson & Matessa, 1997;
Farrell & Lewandowsky, 2004; Oberauer, 2003; Thomas, Milner,
& Haberlandt, 2003) and can be attributed to preparatory processes
(Farrell & Lewandowsky, 2002, 2004), particularly in the postcued
task used here. Of greater interest was the observed significant
interaction between grouping instruction and serial position,
F(2.75, 107.14) ⫽ 6.27, p ⫽ .001, ␩2p ⫽ .14. Inspection of Figure 4
shows the expected effects of grouping in discontinuously elevating the latency of the fourth item (the first item in the second
group), a marker of grouping of the list.
Though less pronounced, similar effects of grouping were observed for the timing task. Inspection of the left panel of Figure 5
reveals patterns of output times similar to those in the order task,

in particular a discontinuous effect of grouping in elevating the
output time for the fourth position. Consistent with this, a 2
(instruction: ungrouped vs. grouped) ⫻ 6 (serial position) ANOVA
revealed significant effects of serial position, F(1.76, 68.64) ⫽
82.92, p ⬍ .001, ␩2p ⫽ .68, and a significant interaction, F(3.67,
142.97) ⫽ 5.36, p ⫽ .001, ␩2p ⫽ .12; the main effect of grouping
was not significant, F(1, 39) ⬍ 1.00, ␩2p ⫽ .01.
Although the interaction between serial position and grouping
instruction is indicative of the peak in latencies at Position 4
consistent with the grouping strategy (Maybery et al., 2002), an
analysis was desired to specifically test for the predicted discontinuity in latencies at the suggested group boundary. Previously,
researchers’ analyses have focused on comparing the peak point
with the surrounding points using, for example, t tests (Maybery et
al., 2002). Here a related approach was employed that uses information from the entire serial position function to determine a
baseline with which to compare the peaked latencies. Inspection of
a variety of reports of latency serial position functions for serial
recall uncontaminated by grouping suggests that after the first
output position, the serial position function for ungrouped lists is
either monotonic (approximately linear) or quadratic (Farrell &
Lewandowsky, 2004; Maybery et al., 2002). Accordingly, for each
participant, a second-order polynomial was fit to the latencies from
Serial Positions 2, 3, 5, and 6 separately for ungrouped and
grouped conditions, and the deviation between the observed latency at the fourth serial position and that predicted from the
polynomial fit was calculated. Statistics for the resulting grouping
deviations are shown in Table 1. Paired samples t tests comparing
grouping deviations in the ungrouped and grouped conditions
revealed significantly larger (more positive) differences for both
the order task, t(39) ⫽ 3.64, p ⫽ .001, Cohen’s d ⫽ 0.58, and the
timing task, t(39) ⫽ 3.77, p ⫽ .001, d ⫽ 0.60, in the grouped
condition. These results indicate that both tasks were sensitive to
the instructions to group lists and that such instructions led to a
lengthening of the pause in output separating the groups in both
tasks.
2
In cases in which Mauchly’s test of sphericity was significant,
ANOVA results are reported with the Greenhouse–Geisser correction
applied.

FARRELL

134

Figure 5. Mean output times on the timing task for ungrouped and grouped lists, plotted by serial position for
the three experiments.

Does Input Timing Predict Output Timing?
Input– output regression. To determine whether input timing
predicts output timing, we fit a mixed-effects linear regression
model (see, e.g., Pinheiro & Bates, 2000) to the data, with input
durations for Serial Positions 1–5 as the predictor and the times
between key presses at recall (which align with the input durations) as the dependent variable; random effects (variability between participants) were included for the intercept and slope
parameters. A benefit of using mixed-effects models is that we can
estimate relationships common to all the participants while accounting for variance due to individual differences. To maximize
the power of the test, prior to application of the model, we filtered
the observed effects of output position on output times (see Figures
4 and 5) from the output durations for each participant by subtracting from each individual response time the mean of all responses for that response’s grouping condition and serial position
(cf. Farrell & Lewandowsky, 2004).
The results of the analysis are shown in the left half of Table 2.
We first look at the timing task, in which reproduction of the input
timings was the goal of the task. Table 2 shows that the estimated

Table 1
Mean Deviations (in Milliseconds) and Standard Deviations
Between Output Times Observed at the Fourth Output Position
(the Group Boundary) and Those Predicted From a SecondOrder Polynomial Fit to All Other Output Times Excluding the
First
Ungrouped
Experiment type
Experiment 1
Order
Timing
Experiment 2
Order
Timing
Experiment 3
Order
Timing

M

Grouped
SD

M

SD

27.58
35.87

129.96
129.61

159.79
148.55

129.6
145.13

⫺24.29
⫺27.54

189.71
154.97

202.29
77.5

232.54
235.72

80.76
35.02

117.64
167.2

164.21
5.02

170.27
191.71

slope was positive and significantly above 0, indicating that participants were able to reproduce the input timings to some extent.
This reproduction was not perfect in that the estimated slopes are
well below 1; if participants were exactly matching the input
timings with their responses, the estimated slopes should be equal
to 1. One possibility is that the output timing that participants
produce is a speeded up version of the input timing, given that
people can underestimate durations in time estimation and time
reproduction tasks (see, e.g., Fraisse, 1984; Wearden & Ferrara,
1993). This is unlikely, as rerunning these analyses with rescaled
input and output durations (such that input and output durations
both had standard deviations of 1) gave similar slope estimates.
Instead, the lower slope estimate is likely to be a consequence of
regression toward the mean.
Table 2 also gives the parameter estimates when applying the
mixed-effects linear regression to the output times from the order
task. Recall that the order task required only ordered recall of the
digits on the list, with the presentation durations being irrelevant.
Table 2 shows that output times nonetheless significantly predicted
the output times produced by the participants. The slope estimates
indicate that this is only a weak dependence, with both slopes
being below 0.1. Although theoretically these slopes would be
equal to 1 for a perfect dependence, these slope estimates are better
put in perspective by comparing them with the parameter estimates
from the timing task. Such comparison reveals the order task
estimates to be between roughly one quarter and one ninth of the
values in the timing task.
Before moving on, we consider one potential confound in these
results. One strategy that participants may be employing in these
experiments is to use any pauses that are longer than average as a
basis to group lists (see, e.g., Lewandowsky & Brown, 2005). For
example, if there happens to be a long pause after onset of the
second item, participants may use the extra time during presentation of the item (or after the item, in later experiments) to group the
list in a 2– 4 structure. If participants then leave a longer pause at
the resulting group boundary because of this grouping strategy, as
was observed for the group structure suggested by the experimenter in the grouped condition (see Figures 4 and 5), then we
may see an artificial dependence between input and output times in

TIMING AND ORDER MEMORY

135

Table 2
Maximum Likelihood Slope Parameter Estimates and Significance Tests From the Mixed-Effects Linear Regression Model Predicting
Output Timing From Input Timing
All responses
Task and
group type

␤

SE

t

Excluding longest response
df

p

␤

SE

t

df

p

Experiment 1
Order task
Ungrouped
Grouped
Timing task
Ungrouped
Grouped

.07
.03

0.02
0.01

5.12
2.58

5959
5959

.00
.01

.03
.02

0.01
0.01

2.73
2.75

4759
4759

.01
.01

.31
.27

0.03
0.03

12.23
10.19

5959
5959

.00
.00

.23
.18

0.02
0.02

13.37
9.32

4759
4759

.00
.00

Experiment 2
Order task
Ungrouped
Grouped
Timing task
Ungrouped
Grouped

.09
.04

0.03
0.03

2.93
1.13

3959
3959

.01
.26

.03
.03

0.02
0.02

2.04
1.85

3159
3159

.04
.06

.41
.32

0.03
0.03

12.86
10.02

3959
3959

.00
.00

.29
.22

0.03
0.02

10.68
8.92

3159
3159

.00
.00

Experiment 3
Order task
Ungrouped
Grouped
Timing task
Ungrouped
Grouped

.06
.01

0.02
0.02

3.39
0.34

5642
5642

.00
.74

.02
.00

0.01
0.01

2.56
⫺0.24

4502
4502

.00
.80

.58
.46

0.03
0.03

20.19
16.46

5642
5642

.00
.00

.41
.32

0.02
0.02

16.66
13.45

4502
4502

.00
.00

the absence of any retention of temporal information.3 To address
this issue, we fit the mixed-effects model to the same set of data,
with the longest output time in each list recall excluded, on the
assumption that the longest response would be a marker for any
grouping effects. Note that the resulting inclusion criterion is
conservative in that the longest pause was always assumed to
follow from a grouping strategy, and there was no explicit test for
grouping. Nevertheless, a significant relationship remained between input and output times in both the order and the timing task,
though the slope estimates were generally reduced (see the right
half of Table 2).
Migration errors. Additional information about the relationship between temporal information and order information can be
obtained by examining the types of errors that participants make in
the timing task. One marker of the ordering component underlying
the serial recall task is referred to as the locality constraint: Items
that are not recalled in their correct position tend to be recalled in
nearby positions (Henson, Norris, Page, & Baddeley, 1996;
Nairne, 1990; Page & Norris, 1998; Parmentier & Jones, 2000). If,
at some level above the representation of individual durations,
timing recall is driven by the same ordering processes or representations that drive ordered recall of other types of information,
we would expect that timing errors should obey the locality constraint; that is, if a particular duration is recalled at the wrong
position, it should tend to be reproduced at a nearby position. One
challenge in examining such migration errors is determining which
durations in the output sequence map to which durations in the
input sequence, given the continuous nature of the responses. This

issue was addressed by ordering the input and output durations for
each list and designating an input– output mapping on the basis of
a common ordinal code. For example, for the ordered set of input
durations {300 ms, 400 ms, 500 ms, 200 ms, 100 ms} and output
durations {400 ms, 300 ms, 200 ms, 100 ms, 500 ms}, the input
codes would be {3, 4, 5, 2, 1}, and the output codes would be {4,
3, 2, 1, 5}, such that, for example, the first output duration would
be taken to match the second input duration in the original list
(both being the fourth-longest duration, “4,” in their respective
timing sequence). Using this procedure to discretize the stimuli
and responses, we constructed a transposition gradient by tallying
the frequency of migration errors committed over various distances (e.g., recalling the fourth item at the second position would
be a transposition distance of 2).
Before being interpreted, these transposition gradients should be
corrected for the chance of conducting transpositions of various
distances; for example, for an ordered list of five durations, there
are two ways for a transposition distance of 4 to occur (the first
item being recalled at the fifth position, or the fifth item being
recalled at the first position) and eight ways of committing a
transposition error distance of 1. To assess the deviation of these
gradients from chance, and to specifically determine whether such
deviations are in line with the locality constraint, we fit two simple
models to the transposition data. The first “random” model assumed that the only errors made on the timing task were due to
3

I am indebted to Murray Maybery for pointing out this possibility.

FARRELL

136

confusions between items of similar duration. Given the random
assignment of durations to positions, this was approximated by
assuming that an item was recalled at the correct position with
probability 1 ⫺ pit, and was otherwise recalled at a randomly
selected position with equal probability for all positions. As an
alternative model characterizing the locality constraint, a version
of the perturbation model of serial order memory was fit to the data
(Estes, 1972, 1997; Lee & Estes, 1977; Nairne, 1992). The perturbation model assumes that forgetting of serial order occurs over
time because of the repeated perturbation of the position of items
in memory. At each time step an item i migrates to an adjacent
position (i ⫺ 1 or i ⫹ 1) with probability pord; otherwise, the item
remains in the same position (see Nairne, 1992, for fully specified
equations). Repeated application of the perturbation process leads
to transposition gradients embodying the locality constraint:
Transpositions over short distances are more frequent than those
covering larger distances, above and beyond the different opportunities for making such transpositions completely at chance (Estes, 1972; Nairne, 1992). For application of the model here, and
following precedent (Nairne, 1992), 10 perturbation cycles were
assumed to take place for all items prior to retrieval. On retrieval
of each item there was an opportunity for the item to be confused
with other durations on the basis of similarity as in the random
model; again, such an item-based confusion occurred with probability pit. This allowed for the determination of the relative contribution of item-based and position-based information to the
transposition errors.
The models were fit to the aggregate data by minimizing the
chi-square deviation between each model and the data (including
correct responses, with a transposition distance of 0); for a particular set of parameter values, predictions were determined from
100,000 model replications. For the random model, pit ⫽ .872 for
the ungrouped condition and .897 for the grouped condition,
respectively; for the perturbation model, the ungrouped and
grouped conditions respectively gave parameter estimates of pit ⫽
.872 and .860, and pord ⫽ .001 and .027. A chi-square test
comparing the two models indicated a nonsignificant difference
between the two models for the ungrouped condition, ␹2(1, N ⫽
6,000) ⫽ 0.29, p ⫽ .59. For the grouped condition, a significant
difference was observed, ␹2(1, N ⫽ 6,000) ⫽ 5.58, p ⫽ .02. Figure
6 plots summary results of the modeling for Experiment 1 (top
panels). Plotted in the figure are the deviation from chance (i.e.,
the predictions of the best-fitting chance model) for the data
(triangles) and the best-fitting predictions of the perturbation
model (circles); transpositions in the figure have been grouped into
“local” (transposition distance of 1) and “remote” (transposition
distance ⬎ 1) transpositions. The right panel of Figure 6 shows a
tendency for the random model to underpredict transpositions with
a distance of 1 and overpredict more remote transpositions. This
pattern is captured by the order-based perturbation model, indicating some conformity of the data to the locality constraint. No such
pattern is evident for the ungrouped condition (left panel).

Discussion
The numerous data provided by Experiment 1 provide a rich and
complex picture of the relationship between time and order memory. The similar effects of the grouping manipulation on order
recall and timing recall indicate some common basis for timing

Figure 6. Difference between the frequency of transposition errors
predicted by the random model and those observed in the data (triangles) and in the predictions of the perturbation model (circles) for the
timing task. The transpositions are grouped into “local” transpositions
(transposition distance ⫽ 1) and “remote” transpositions (transposition
distance ⬎ 1). The rows respectively correspond to Experiments 1, 2,
and 3, whereas the left and right columns show data for the ungrouped
and grouped conditions, respectively. See text for complete details of
the modeling.

and order information in short-term memory. The close connection
between the sequencing and dynamics of recall is also revealed by
the mirroring of input timing in output timing, regardless of
whether the task called for recall of such information. Finally, the
slight but significant conformation of timing recall to the locality
constraint in the grouped condition is suggestive of some higher
order timing or ordering mechanism at play above the level of
individual durations.
A full consideration of the implications of these results is
explained in the General Discussion section. First, two further
experiments are presented that serve as replications of this initial
experiment and that generalize the results to provide further constraints on the theories under consideration.

TIMING AND ORDER MEMORY

Experiment 2
Experiment 2 served as a basic replication of Experiment 1 but
also extended the procedure in two ways (see Figure 1). First,
digits were presented auditorily rather than visually. Some experiments have demonstrated an auditory advantage for recall of
timing information, though this only appears to be the case in
specific circumstances (e.g., Collier & Logan, 2000; Glenberg &
Jona, 1991; Glenberg et al., 1989; Glenberg & Swanson, 1986;
though see Nimmo & Lewandowsky, 2006; Schab & Crowder,
1989; Watkins et al., 1992). Although the empirical status of
modality effects in temporal sequencing is unclear, the fact that a
modality effect may sometimes be observed in rhythm memory,
and may be observed for perception of single intervals (e.g.,
Wearden, Edwards, & Fakhri, 1998), suggests that this is an
important variable to consider. Additionally, some researchers
have suggested that timing of durations involves processes akin to
the phonological loop in Baddeley’s (1986) working memory
model (Franssen, Vandierendonck, & Van Hiel, 2006; Saito &
Ishio, 1998). Thus, it may be that different timing mechanisms are
recruited for auditory and visual materials. In light of these concerns, it seemed appropriate to confirm that the results were
replicated in the auditory modality.
Another change in Experiment 2 was to keep the duration of
items constant and to instead vary the pauses between items to
manipulate list timing. This was done first on pragmatic grounds,
as lengthening auditory stimuli led to unnatural lists that were
difficult to process and may have introduced acoustic artifacts.
Second, this allowed for testing of the temporal isolation effect,
which could not be examined in Experiment 1 given the constant
pauses between items.

Method
Participants and Design
Participants were 40 undergraduate students from the University
of Bristol, who were recruited as part of an opportunity sample and
who provided informed consent for participation. All participants
were native or fluent English speakers. Each participant completed
trials in all cells of the 2 (task type: order vs. timing) ⫻ 2
(instructions: ungrouped vs. grouped) ⫻ 6 (serial position: 1– 6)
design.

Materials and Apparatus
Lists contained six digits that were randomly sampled without
replacement from the 1–9 set and were subject to the same constraints as Experiment 1. The stimuli themselves were recorded
from a male speaker with a neutral English accent and were
digitized for storage on hard disk. We pitch-flattened the digits to
a fundamental frequency of 113 Hz using the phonetics software
Praat (Boersma & Weenink, 2006)—to avoid any grouping effects
arising from pitch variations (see Nicholls & Jones, 2002)—and
we normalized the digits to a constant length of 500 ms. The digits
were additionally padded to give a regular sounding sequence for
different permutations, as it is known (and was observed in pilot
testing) that the subjective experience of the center of an acoustic
stimulus does not exactly relate to the onset of the stimulus (e.g.,

137

Scott, 1998). The average duration of this padding was 85.9 ms
(SD ⫽ 50).
In Experiment 1 the presentation schedule was made irregular
by varying the durations of item presentations. Experimentation
with shortening and lengthening the auditory stimuli suggested this
would lead to unnatural sounding stimuli. Instead, we randomly
varied the pauses between the digits using a similar sampling
procedure to that of Experiment 1. Raw pause durations were
generated by pseudorandomly sampling from a uniform distribution, and the durations on each list were then scaled such that
durations summed to a constant 3,000 ms. There was no minimum
constraint on the pause durations. A histogram of the resulting ISIs
across all participants and serial positions is shown in the right
panel of Figure 2.

Procedure
The experimental procedure was similar to that of Experiment 1,
with the following changes. List stimuli were played over headphones to participants at a comfortable volume determined prior to
the experiment. Forty lists were presented under the standard
instructions and grouping instructions, 20 each for the order task
and timing task, respectively. The entire procedure lasted for
around 45 min.

Results
Ordering Accuracy
The middle panel of Figure 3 plots the accuracy serial position
functions for the ungrouped and grouped conditions. A 2 (instruction: ungrouped vs. grouped) ⫻ 6 (serial position) ANOVA confirmed an apparent main effect of grouping instruction, with
grouped lists being recalled more accurately (ungrouped M ⫽
0.88; grouped M ⫽ 0.92), F(1, 39) ⫽ 9.11, p ⫽ .004, ␩2p ⫽ .19, and
a main effect of serial position, F(2.37, 92.48) ⫽ 28.32, p ⬍ .001,
␩2p ⫽ .42, reflecting the bowed shape of the serial position functions. The interaction between grouping instruction and serial
position failed to reach significance, F(3.10, 120.76) ⫽ 1.95, p ⫽
.124, ␩2p ⫽ .05; nevertheless, there is the visual suggestion of a
scalloped serial position function for the grouped condition.

Output Timing Serial Position Functions
The center panel of Figure 4 plots the mean latency of responses
for the order task for Experiment 2. A 2 (instruction: ungrouped vs.
grouped) ⫻ 6 (serial position) ANOVA revealed a main effect of
serial position, F(1.95, 76.07) ⫽ 168.76, p ⬍ .001, ␩2p ⫽ .81, and
a significant interaction between grouping instruction and serial
position, F(3.69, 143.77) ⫽ 6.96, p ⬍ .001, ␩2p ⫽ .15; the effect of
grouping instruction was not significant, F(1, 39) ⬍ 1.00, p ⫽ .68,
␩2p ⬍ .01.
A similar pattern of effects was observed for the timing task (see
middle panel of Figure 5). A 2 (instruction: ungrouped vs.
grouped) ⫻ 6 (serial position) ANOVA revealed a significant
effect of serial position, F(1.63, 63.90) ⫽ 64.87, p ⬍ .001, ␩2p ⫽
.63, and a significant interaction, F(4.09, 159.50) ⫽ 4.03, p ⫽
.004, ␩2p ⫽ .09; the effect of grouping instruction was not significant, F(1, 39) ⬍ 1.00, ␩2p ⫽ .001.

138

FARRELL

As for Experiment 1, a discontinuous peak was apparent in
output times at the fourth serial position in the grouped condition;
this effect was apparent in both the order task and the timing task.
This was verified by examining grouping deviations as in Experiment 1 (see Table 1). Paired samples t tests comparing grouping
deviations in the ungrouped and grouped conditions revealed
larger (more positive) differences under grouping conditions for
both the order task, t(39) ⫽ 5.52, p ⬍ .001, d ⫽ 0.87, and the
timing task, t(39) ⫽ 2.82, p ⫽ .008, d ⫽ 0.44. Replicating
Experiment 1, the instruction to group specifically led to a lengthening of the pause in output separating the groups in both tasks.

Does Input Timing Predict Output Timing?
Input– output regression. Fitting a mixed-effects linear regression model, with the pauses between items in the input as predictors and the times between key presses at recall as the dependent
variable, gave similar results to Experiment 1. The results presented in the left half of Table 2 show similar sized estimates of the
regression slope relating input times to output times in the timing
task, these estimates being highly significant. The significance
values for the slopes for the order task were significant for the
ungrouped condition and failed to reach significance for the
grouped condition; the slopes themselves were of similar size to
those in Experiment 1. The results in the right half of Table 2 for
the analyses on all data excluding (listwise) the longest response
durations again show that this relationship between input and
output was not attributable to confounding effects of grouping,
with a similar pattern of results in both the order task and the
timing task, with an additional marginally significant beta for the
grouped condition in the order task.
Migration errors. As for Experiment 1, the “chance” model
and the perturbation model were fit to the frequencies of transpositions over various distances. For the random model, pit ⫽ .907
for the ungrouped condition and .910 for the grouped condition,
respectively; for the perturbation model, the ungrouped and
grouped conditions respectively gave parameter estimates of pit ⫽
.903 and .913, and pord ⬍ .001 for both conditions. A chi-square
test comparing the two models showed a nonsignificant difference
between the two models for the ungrouped condition, ␹2(1, N ⫽
4,000) ⫽ 0.601, p ⫽ .44, and the grouped condition, ␹2(1, N ⫽
4,000) ⫽ 0.24, p ⫽ .72. The difference in frequencies between
those predicted by the chance model, and those from the data and
the perturbation model are shown in the middle row of Figure 6.
Consistent with the modeling results, there is no evidence that
transpositions in Experiment 2 conformed to the locality constraint.

Does Input Timing Predict Order Accuracy?
The manipulation of the pauses between list items in Experiment 2 also allowed calculation of the extent to which the relative
temporal isolation of items in the order task resulted in enhanced
recall for those items (cf. Lewandowsky & Brown, 2005). To
determine whether input timing predicts output timing, we used a
mixed-effects logistic regression model (see, e.g., Pinheiro &
Bates, 2000) to predict the accuracy (i.e., either correct or incorrect) of each individual response at Serial Positions 2, 3, 4, and 5
(Serial Positions 1 and 6 were excluded as these respectively have

missing preceding and following pause durations). The predictors
were the length of the pause preceding and following each item;
random effects (variability between participants) were included for
both predictors. One concern was that effects of temporal isolation
might be observed because of grouping effects, as detailed in
presentation of the preceding mixed-effects linear regression. In
this case it may be that participants use a long pause for extra
rehearsals or to construct a new group and that there is therefore an
advantage for the immediately preceding item (Lewandowsky &
Brown, 2005). To address this possibility, before the analysis was
run, we removed the longest input duration—and the items preceding and following it—from the data prior to analysis.4
The maximum likelihood estimates and model tests are shown
in Table 3. As can be seen, there was little evidence in the data
from Experiment 2 that surrounding items by longer pauses led to
more accurate ordered recall, with the parameter estimates (betas)
for both preceding (“pre”) and following (“post”) durations being
fairly close to, and not significantly different from, 0.

Discussion
The results of Experiment 2 are in line with those from Experiment 1: Grouping had effects on both order and timing recall, and
input timing was reflected in output timing for both tasks. Additionally, investigation of the relationship between input timing and
ordered recall failed to suggest that recall of items benefitted from
temporal isolation. This is consistent with previous failures to
demonstrate a temporal isolation effect in serial recall (Lewandowsky & Brown, 2005; Nimmo & Lewandowsky, 2005, 2006;
Parmentier, King, & Dennis, 2006).
These results provide clear evidence for some common basis for
short-term memory for time and order information. The common
effect of grouping on the dynamics of recall in the order and time
recall tasks is consistent with suggestions that grouping has effects
on the internal timing signal driving ordered recall (Brown et al.,
2000; Burgess & Hitch, 1999). The lack of a temporal isolation
effect also places constraints on such a relationship by indicating
that a time-based timing signal as assumed in the OSCAR model
(Brown et al., 2000) does not solely underpin sequential recall
from short-term memory. The temporal isolation data are consistent with the generalization of the OSCAR model and Burgess and
Hitch’s (1999) model instantiated in the SIMPLE model (Brown et
al., 2007), in which both temporal and ordinal information may be
used at the time of retrieval and may be differentially weighted on
the basis of task demands (Brown et al., 2007; Lewandowsky et
al., in press); the lack of temporal isolation effects implies majority
weighting of an ordinal dimension.
Nevertheless, a relationship was observed between input timing
and the dynamics of output. If a single form of temporal representation, such as the suggested timing signal, was responsible for
the effects of time on both ordering accuracy (temporal isolation
effects) and latencies (input– output timing coupling), then these
measures theoretically should not dissociate (though in practice
4

The same model was also fit to the data, including the removed
responses and durations. A similar pattern was obtained for both Experiments 2 and 3, with the exception that the effect of “post” duration was
significant for ungrouped lists in Experiment 3.

TIMING AND ORDER MEMORY

Table 3
Maximum Likelihood Slope Parameter Estimates and
Significance Tests From the Mixed-Effects Logistic Regression
Model Predicting Ordered Recall Accuracy in Experiments 2
and 3 From Temporal Isolation (Preceding, “Pre,” and
Following, “Post,” Pause Durations)
Group type

␤

SE

z

ferent types of information (see, e.g., Duncan & Murdock, 2000).
One cost of such an approach is that these conditions, and the
results they give rise to, will not necessarily generalize to typical
order and timing recall experiments. Accordingly, Experiment 3
replicated the basic procedure of Experiments 1 and 2, with the
primary exception that the recall task was precued and blocked, in
line with typical short-term memory experiments.

p

Experiment 2
Ungrouped
Pre
Post
Grouped
Pre
Post

Method

.062
⫺.004

0.11
0.11

0.58
⫺0.04

.56
.97

.13
.13

0.11
0.11

1.19
1.18

.24
.24

Experiment 3
Ungrouped
Pre
Post
Grouped
Pre
Post

139

.29
.25

0.16
0.17

1.74
1.48

.08
.14

.60
.12

0.17
0.16

3.47
0.72

⬍.01
.47

differential sensitivity in the two effects could give rise to an
apparent dissociation). Along with those of Brown et al. (2007)
and Lewandowsky et al. (in press), these results suggest instead
that time is represented at two levels in this task: at the level of
sequencing of the entire list (equating to the timing signal or
dimension in the models of Brown et al., 2000, 2007; Burgess &
Hitch, 1999; and accounting for the common effects of grouping
on recall latencies) and at the level of individual durations (accounting for the relationship between individual input and output
times in both tasks). Glenberg et al. (1989; see also Glenberg &
Jona, 1991) made a similar distinction in accounting for their
observed modality effect on recall accuracy in a rhythm reproduction task, arguing that any observed modality effects follow from
the influence of modality on the tuning of representation of the
order of events, not of individual durations. The results here,
particularly the common effects of grouping, suggest that the
posited representation of sequence information is common to
memory for order and time.
Before drawing some final conclusions, one final experiment is
presented that addresses an issue suggested by the SIMPLE framework. The possibility that participants choose to weight different
dimensions of evidence begs the question of the extent to which an
artificial weighting of dimensions was induced by the postcued
nature of Experiments 1 and 2. In Experiment 3, we examine the
relationship between serial and temporal recall again and also
consider the extent to which these relationships are indicative of a
basic relationship between these tasks.

Experiment 3
The postcueing procedure employed in Experiments 1 and 2
allowed comparison of order recall and timing recall under very
similar conditions. This postcueing controls strategic processes at
encoding that might otherwise be differentially employed for dif-

Participants and Design
Participants were 57 undergraduate students from the University
of Bristol, who were recruited as part of an opportunity sample and
who provided informed consent for participation. This sample
consisted of an original sample of 40 participants, plus an additional sample of 17 participants; the additional participants were
run given an apparent failure to replicate the grouping effect for
the order task from visual inspection of summary statistics.5 All
participants were native or fluent English speakers. Each participant completed trials in all cells of the 2 (task type: order vs.
timing) ⫻ 2 (instructions: ungrouped vs. grouped) ⫻ 6 (serial
position: 1– 6) design.

Materials and Apparatus
List construction and apparatus were identical to that in Experiment 2, with the exception that an alternative method was used to
generate the random pauses between items. Following other studies on the effects of timing on order memory (e.g., Lewandowsky
et al., 2006), for each list the pauses between items were sampled
without replacement from the set of pauses {100 ms, 200 ms, 400
ms, 800 ms, 1,200 ms}, giving a summed pause duration of 2,700
ms. This guaranteed that durations on each list were all uniquely
discriminable.

Procedure
The procedure was identical to that of Experiment 2, with the
major exception that the cue for the task to be performed was
presented prior to the list. Each trial began with the presentation of
the visual cue (“NUMBERS” or “RHYTHM”) for 1,500 ms,
followed by list presentation as in Experiment 2. After presentation
of the final list item, there was a pause for 500 ms, followed by the
generic recall cue “RECALL.” On appearance of this cue, participants were to perform the recall task indicated at the beginning of
the trial. To further disambiguate the task to be performed, we ran
trials of the same type in single blocks within each level of the
grouping variable (i.e., 20 order trials followed by 20 timing trials
in each grouping condition or vice versa), with the order of the
5
Although, in general, running an experiment until significance is
achieved will lead to problems in inference in the standard null hypothesis
testing approach, in this case we are interested in the results on the timing
task conditionalized on the assumption of a grouping effect for the order
task. If this assumption is not met, then an observation of (or failure to
observe) a grouping effect in the timing task is not diagnostic regarding the
relation between the two tasks.

FARRELL

140

blocks approximately counterbalanced between participants.6 The
entire procedure lasted for around 45 min.

Results
Ordering Accuracy
The right panel of Figure 3 plots the accuracy serial position
functions for the ungrouped and grouped conditions. A 2 (instruction: ungrouped vs. grouped) ⫻ 6 (serial position) ANOVA failed
to show a significant effect of grouping, F(1, 56) ⬍ 1.00, ␩2p ⫽
.002, or a significant interaction, F(3.30, 184.56) ⬍ 1.00, ␩2p ⫽
.015; this is likely due to ceiling effects given the overall very high
accuracy. A significant effect of serial position was obtained,
F(2.94, 164.47) ⫽ 13.38, p ⬍ .001, ␩2p ⫽ .193.

Output Timing Serial Position Functions
The right panel of Figure 4 plots the mean latency of responses
for the order recall task for Experiment 3. A 2 (instruction:
ungrouped vs. grouped) ⫻ 6 (serial position) ANOVA revealed a
practically significant effect of grouping instruction, F(1, 56) ⫽
3.99, p ⫽ .051, ␩2p ⫽ .066, indicating longer mean output times for
the ungrouped condition (ungrouped M ⫽ 556.3 ms; grouped M ⫽
531.0 ms), and a main effect of serial position, F(1.94, 108.33) ⫽
92.63, p ⬍ .001, ␩2p ⫽ .623. The interaction between grouping
instruction and serial position was also significant, F(2.57,
143.73) ⫽ 3.52, p ⫽ .022, ␩2p ⫽ .059.
This pattern of results failed to replicate in the timing task (see
the right panel of Figure 5). A 2 (instruction: ungrouped vs.
grouped) ⫻ 6 (serial position) ANOVA revealed a significant
effect of grouping instruction (ungrouped M ⫽ 963.8 ms; grouped
M ⫽ 912.8 ms), F(1, 56) ⫽ 31.55, p ⬍ .001, ␩2p ⫽ .360, and serial
position, F(2.29, 128.41) ⫽ 6.91, p ⫽ .001, ␩2p ⫽ .110; however,
the interaction between grouping and serial position was not significant, F(3.85, 215.57) ⫽ 1.72, p ⫽ .15, ␩2p ⫽ .030. Inspection of
Figure 5 (right panel) shows that output times were slightly slower
in the ungrouped condition but fails to suggest a discontinuous
peak for output times at the group boundary; if anything, the serial
position function for the grouped condition approximately resembles that for the ungrouped condition in the other experiments and
task.
The different effects of instructed grouping on the order and
timing task were confirmed by examining grouping deviations (see
Table 1). Paired samples t tests comparing grouping deviations in
the ungrouped and grouped conditions revealed larger (more positive) differences for the grouped condition in the order task,
t(56) ⫽ 3.02, p ⫽ .004, d ⫽ 0.40, despite evidence from Figure 4
and Table 1 that the grouping strategy was often being employed
spontaneously even in the ungrouped condition. In contrast, the
difference in grouping deviations between ungrouped and grouped
conditions in the timing task was not found to be significant,
t(56) ⬍ 1.00, p ⫽ .339, d ⫽ 0.13.

Does Input Timing Predict Output Timing?
Input– output regression. Fitting a mixed-effects linear regression model to the data from Experiment 3 revealed a similar
pattern of effects to those in Experiments 1 and 2, with one
exception. The left half of Table 2 shows that, for the timing task,

slope parameter estimates were large and highly significant. For
the order task the relationship was found to be significant for the
ungrouped condition, with similar parameter estimates to those
observed in the previous experiments. In contrast, the regression
coefficient for the data in the grouped condition was not significantly different from 0. As shown in the right half of Table 2, these
results remained unchanged, with the exception of a downwards
shift in the slope estimates, when the possible contributions of
time-based grouping were approximately controlled by removing
the longest output times.
Migration errors. Best-fitting parameters were obtained for
the models as before. For the random model, pit ⫽ .776 for the
ungrouped condition and .811 for the grouped condition, respectively; for the perturbation model, the ungrouped and grouped
conditions respectively gave parameter estimates of pit ⫽ .751 and
.776, and pord ⫽ .010 and .013. A chi-square test comparing the
two models revealed a difference approaching significance for the
ungrouped condition, ␹2(1, N ⫽ 5,700) ⫽ 3.39, p ⫽ .066, and a
significant difference for the grouped condition, ␹2(1, N ⫽
5,700) ⫽ 5.65, p ⫽ .018. Differences in transposition frequencies
by migration distance for Experiment 3 are shown in the bottom
row of Figure 6. The plotted results confirm the pattern implied by
the model statistics, with a tendency for there to be greater frequencies of transpositions to adjacent positions (transposition displacement of 1) in both the data and the perturbation model
compared with those expected from the random model.

Does Input Timing Predict Order Accuracy?
As for Experiment 2, a mixed-effects logistic regression model
was applied to the data to determine whether input timing predicts
order recall accuracy. The same model was applied here, including
the removal of the longest pause and surrounding responses on
each list prior to analysis. The maximum likelihood estimates and
model tests are shown in the bottom half of Table 3. Although the
“post” duration estimates did not differ significantly from 0, the
effect of preceding (“pre”) durations was found to be significant
for the grouped condition and marginal for the ungrouped condition. The parameter estimates for the ungrouped and grouped
conditions indicate a respective increase (multiplication) in odds of
recalling an item correctly of 1.34 and 1.82 with each unit (seconds) increase in the pause duration preceding an item. Thus,
ordered recall benefitted from temporal isolation, though in an
apparently asymmetric fashion.

Discussion
Experiment 3, which employed a precueing procedure, showed
some interesting similarities and contrasts with Experiments 1 and
2. In contrast to the preceding experiments, participants did not
appear to group lists in the timing experiment as they did in
Experiments 1 and 2, although a grouping strategy did appear to be
employed on order trials. In line with previous experiments, input
timing was reflected in output timing in both the order and timing
tasks; in the order task, this was regardless of the experimental
6

Order of blocks was fully counterbalanced for all participants except
Participant 57, who received the same block order as Participant 1.

TIMING AND ORDER MEMORY

setup, which allowed timing information to be ignored throughout
order recall blocks. Finally, there was some evidence of a temporal
isolation effect in Experiment 3, where none was observed in
Experiment 2. Together, these results reinforce the general picture
emerging from Experiments 1 and 2 that timing and order information are not entirely independent in short-term memory and
place constraints on interpretations of the relationship between the
two. In the General Discussion section, we consider the possible
source and nature of the overlap between the two tasks and what
the differences between tasks might tell us about the function of
the putative timing signal in short-term memory.

General Discussion
The results of the experiments can be summarized as follows.
First, when participants were not precued about the nature of the
information to be recalled, instructed grouping had effects on the
dynamics of recall of both order and timing information: In grouping conditions, participants left an extended pause between groups
in their output (cf. Farrell & Lewandowsky, 2004; Maybery et al.,
2002). When the recall task was precued, grouping had this effect
on the latencies of serial recall but not recall of list timing. Second,
it was generally the case that input timing was reflected in the
timing of participants’ output, even in the serial recall task in
which recall of timing was not explicitly required. Third, there was
some inconsistent evidence for temporal isolation effects: For the
precued experiment (Experiment 3), items preceded by a longer
pause were more likely to be correctly recalled.
Along with other experiments examining the relationship between time and order in short-term memory (e.g., Elvevåg et al.,
2004; Farrell & McLaughlin, in press; Lewandowsky et al., in
press; Saito, 2001), these data are both suggestive and constraining
with respect to models of short-term memory of order and temporal structure of sequences of information. The specific implications
of each of the findings is considered in turn.

Grouping Effects on Recall Timing
The common effects of instructed grouping on recall and timing
in the postcued task (Experiments 1 and 2) are consistent with the
notion that a common timing signal supports positional representations in serial recall. Researchers have previously demonstrated
a peak in latencies at group boundaries in serial recall using
temporal and spatial grouping (Anderson & Matessa, 1997; Farrell
& Lewandowsky, 2004; Maybery et al., 2002; Parmentier, Andrés,
et al., 2006); our results here— using instructed grouping, along
with the lack of effect of the length of the pause in temporal
grouping (Maybery et al., 2002)—suggest that this effect follows
from organizational strategies employed by participants. The novel
finding from the experiments was the occurrence of a latency peak
at the boundary between groups in the timing task. This latency
peak is surprising in that it is contrary to task demands. Leaving a
pause between groups disrupts the dynamics and may make the
recall of the duration coinciding with the group boundary less
accurate. This is one explanation for the failure to observe a
latency peak on the timing task in the precued experiment (Experiment 3), in which participants apparently chose not to use a
grouping strategy despite being instructed to do so. Although
others have noted a tendency for participants to segment longer

141

sequences of intervals into subgroups in timing recall, this is
assumed to occur on the basis of intervals themselves (Ross &
Houtsma, 1994); for the short sequences here, in which the suggested grouping structure would not always be consistent with the
grouping structure suggested by the intervals, the 3–3 grouping
would not have been a useful strategy.7
The suggestion of a common underlying timing signal that is
affected by grouping is consistent with neuroscientific evidence on
the mechanisms underlying grouping effects. In a functional magnetic resonance imaging experiment exploring the neural underpinnings of verbal short-term memory, Henson et al. (2000) observed that activity in the left dorsolateral premotor cortex
increased when placing an additional requirement on participants
to remember order information. Henson et al. also observed that
introducing a grouping structure decreased activation in this region
and medial thalamus while increasing activation in the right inferior frontal gyrus (IFG). Henson et al. suggested that the change in
activity in premotor cortex reflected the modulation by temporal
grouping of the timing signal assumed in the models of Burgess
and Hitch (1999) and Brown et al. (2000). In further support of
this, Henson (2005) pointed to evidence of premotor cortex involvement in timing tasks, such as enacting repetitive finger movements (e.g., Catalan, Honda, Weeks, Cohen, & Hallett, 1998). The
increase in activity in the right IFG observed by Henson et al. in
grouped lists is interesting in the light of carefully controlled
functional magnetic resonance imaging work by Livesey, Wall,
and Smith (2007), who identified the right IFG (specifically, its
confluence with the anterior insula) as one of only three brain
regions specifically involved in timing behavior beyond more
general processes. The results of Livesey et al. suggest that the
premotor activity witnessed by Henson et al. reflects operation of
more general working memory processes; one interpretation is that
this activity reflects the operation of a timing mechanism subserved and driven by working memory, as suggested in the work
of Fortin and others (Field & Groeger, 2004; Fortin & Breton,
1995; Fortin & Massé, 1999; Fortin & Rousseau, 1987; L. A. Jones
& Wearden, 2004; Neath & Fortin, 2005; Wearden & Ferrara,
1993). Indeed, in the framework of the SIMPLE model, this could
be seen as a shift from the use of ordinal information (subserved by
dorsolateral premotor cortex) in serial recall of ungrouped lists to
the use of both ordinal (within-group) and temporal (within-list,
supported by right IFG) information in grouped lists.
Despite this consistency with timing signal hypothesis, this
account does not explain where the pause between groups comes
from in the first place, especially in the experiments here in which
the grouping was only instructed, and no temporal separation of
the groups was explicitly indicated. Although Maybery et al.
(2002) convincingly demonstrated that directly encoding the pause
between groups using the timing signal could not account for the
pause in participants’ output, one possibility is that grouping
7
One possible criticism, raised by a reviewer, is that the effect of
grouping on the timing task demonstrates that participants are no longer
performing this task accurately under grouping instructions. However,
Table 2 reveals that grouping instructions did not grossly disrupt performance on the timing task, with similar regression estimates for the ungrouped and grouped conditions, and with only slightly poorer performance in the grouped condition generally.

FARRELL

142

(whether instructed or not) leads participants to implicitly insert a
fixed pause along their internal representation of time regardless of
the actual time separating groups (e.g., a list presented as
3.4..7..2.1..5 is internally represented as 3.4..7. . . ..2.1..5 when a
3–3 grouping structure is suggested). An alternative explanation is
that the common effects in the order and timing tasks do not point
to the dynamics of a common timing signal but instead reflect the
dynamics of retrieval, with the time between groups reflecting the
time taken to retrieve a representation of the next group (Anderson
& Matessa, 1997; Henson et al., 2003; Maybery et al., 2002). In
other words, the same representations and processes may drive
ordered sequence recall for both information about digits and
information about their durations without the necessary involvement of a timing signal. We return to this possibility shortly.

Reflection of Input Timing in Output Timing
The finding that participants’ output timing reflected the timing
of presented sequences is consistent with previous demonstrations
that information about the temporal structure of sequences (i.e.,
rhythm) is a type of information readily processed and retained in
short-term memory (Collier & Logan, 2000; Farrell & McLaughlin, in press; Glenberg & Jona, 1991; Glenberg et al., 1989; Ross
& Houtsma, 1994; Watkins et al., 1992). A more surprising observation was that input times were also reflected in output times
in the order task; the only clear exception to this finding was a lack
of relationship observed in the grouping condition in the precued
task of Experiment 3. There are two possible explanations for this
general relationship between the timing of list items and their
output. This relationship is what would be expected from the
real-time ticking forward of the timing signal assumed in models,
such as the OSCAR model and some interpretations of Burgess
and Hitch’s (1999) model (see, e.g., Ng & Maybery, 2002a, 2005).
Under this assumption, the isolated lack of effect for grouped lists
in Experiment 3 and other experiments (Maybery et al., 2002; Ng
& Maybery, 2002b) might be explained by participants paying
more attention to an ordinal position-in-group dimension in
grouped lists, a strategy not allowed in Experiments 1 and 2 given
the requirement to remember the timing of items. However, the
relationship between the input and output timing was weak for the
serial recall lists (several of the observed relationships were only
marginally significant), suggesting that this timing was not driving
recall in the order task, particularly given the overall high accuracy
of ordered recall. Additionally, the use of a real-time signal also
predicts a temporal isolation effect, which was not universally
observed in the experiments (as discussed below).
An alternative explanation is that recall is not necessarily timebased, but that individuals nonetheless have immediate and compulsory access to the temporal information stored as part of the
information of items. In such a framework it would be the durations of, or intervals between, items that would be the content of
memory and not the time of occurrence of items. The treatment of
intervals as being the unit of information in remembering the
temporal arrangement of sequences is consistent with the treatment
of timing memory elsewhere (e.g., Glenberg & Jona, 1991; Glenberg et al., 1989; Sorkin, 1990). This would also explain the
nonflat serial position functions in the timing task in the ungrouped
condition in the timing task (see Figure 5). These latency serial
position functions from the serial recall task are usually considered

to be measures of the time taken to retrieve, and initiate report of,
successive items (Anderson & Matessa, 1997; Farrell & Lewandowsky, 2002, 2004; Maybery et al., 2002). The similar inverse
U-shaped latency functions for the order task (see Figure 4) and
the timing task (see Figure 5), though flatter in Experiment 3,
suggest that the same process of retrieving and reporting item
information was used in both tasks. Finally, the assumption that
durations form part of the content of memory is also suggested by
the patterns of transpositions observed in the timing task in some
of the conditions considered here (see Figure 6). For both grouping
conditions in Experiment 3, and the ungrouped condition of Experiment 2, it was found that the transposition gradients were fit
significantly (or marginally significantly) better by a model (the
perturbation model; Estes, 1972) in which intervals presented
closer together in the list would be more likely to be confused than
those further apart in the list. Such a locality constraint on transpositions is a benchmark of serial recall performance and is taken
to directly reflect the operation of the mechanism responsible for
ordering in serial recall (Brown et al., 2000; Farrell & Lewandowsky, 2002; Page & Norris, 1998). The transposition data reported here must stand as suggestive, as the locality constraint did
not apply to all conditions and was only weakly observed in the
conditions when the pattern of transpositions deviated significantly
from chance. These weak effects are unsurprising given the implied high confusability of temporal durations implied by the pit
estimates in the modeling; future researchers might consider minimizing these confusions by using a recognition task (cf. Farrell &
McLaughlin, in press) and thus limiting the contribution of reproduction errors to the timing output.
Why is information about the temporal nature of items accessed
and incorporated into the dynamics of serial recall of those items?
Several possibilities immediately present themselves. One possibility is that durational information is useful information for distinguishing between items additional to other aspects of their
identity. A common assumption in models of serial recall, and
memory generally, is that the more detailed the available information about an event, the higher probability of recovery of any
missing information (all other things being equal; e.g., Brown &
Hulme, 1995; Lewandowsky & Farrell, 2000; Nairne, 1990). It
may be then that by attempting to reinstate the timing of items, the
participants in these experiments, particularly Experiment 3, are
supplying temporal information as additional cues to the identities
of items. The stronger claim that different types of information
(including positional and temporal information) are bound together
into integral short-term memory representations may also explain
these results and the common effects of grouping on order and
timing recall. One question is whether this binding occurs automatically or was witnessed in Experiments 1 and 2 because of the
requirement that both order and timing information be attended
to.8 If order and timing information are stored in an integrated
fashion regardless of task demands, this predicts that manipulations of either type of information should have effects on recall of
the other type of information. For example, in a paradigm in which
recognition memory for a sequence of order or timing information
is tested with a probe sequence (e.g., Farrell & McLaughlin, in
press), if integrated representations are formed, we would predict
8

I thank Fabrice Parmentier for raising this issue.

TIMING AND ORDER MEMORY

143

that varying the temporal arrangement of items between presentation and test (independent of order) would affect recognition of
order, and vice versa. If the relationship between ordering and
timing is more hierarchical in nature, with ordering giving access
to timing information, then we would predict that varying timing
information should have no effect on order recognition, whereas
varying order should affect the recognition memory for timing
information.
A second, alternative possibility is that the incorporation of
timing information into the dynamics of serial recall reflects the
deployment of an integrated “action plan.” D. M. Jones, Macken,
and Nicholls (2004) and Macken and Jones (2003) have argued
that what appears to be a specialized system for short-term memory of phonological information is actually the co-opting of perceptual and motor processes to perform sequence production.
From this perspective, many phenomena associated with shortterm memory—such as the effects of phonological similarity,
modality, and irrelevant speech—are all attributed to perception
and motor planning. Recently, Tubau, Hommel, and LópezMoliner (2007) have suggested that action plans formed in sequential learning tasks involve the integration of order information and
relative timing; this follows from Tubau et al.’s observation that
the performance of participants who appeared to be explicitly
learning action plans was adversely affected by disrupting the
timing of the response sequence. The input– output timing coupling witnessed in the experiments here may reflect the partial
integration of order and timing information in such action plans.9
In any case, the significant coupling of input and output timing in
the order task, along with the transposition gradients of temporal
confusions, suggests a role for the information about individual
durations.

reinforces the conclusion that there are several types of temporal
information that might be drawn on in the various short-term
memory tasks.
A plausible explanation for the difference in results between
Experiments 2 and 3 is a trade-off between the dimensions of time
(or position) in the list and durations of items, such that in
Experiment 3, participants were paying more attention to the
ordinal or temporal placement of items and less to duration or
interval information relating to individual items. This would leave
unexplained the reason for participants weighting the time-in-list
dimension where others have failed to observe a temporal isolation
effect. Lewandowsky et al. (in press) have argued that temporal
isolation effects are observed when the order of recall of information is unconstrained, whether that information is about the identity
of items or their placement in a sequence. The observation of a
temporal isolation effect here in the serial recall task, in which
output order is necessarily forward, questions the completeness of
this account and suggests other factors might be at play in such
tasks. A hint about one such factor is the observation that a
temporal isolation effect in Experiment 3 was observed more
strongly in grouped lists (see Table 3). One explanation for this
grouping effect is that, in grouped lists, participants make use of
two dimensions, a temporal dimension and a positional in-group
dimension. Thus, grouping lists forces participants to rely on a
time-based representation of position in the list, giving rise to a
clear temporal isolation effect;10 as suggested above, this may
relate to shifting of reliance on a lateral premotor cortical timing
mechanism to involvement of an additional timing mechanism
associated with right IFG (cf. Henson et al., 2003).

Temporal Isolation Effects

Overall, the results call into question the notion of a single
timing signal driving serial recall and point to a variety of temporal
representations at play in working memory (cf. Glenberg & Jona,
1991). Such a conclusion is not inconsistent with models—such as
those of Brown et al. (2000, 2007) and Burgess and Hitch
(1999)—that assume a hierarchical temporal signal drives ordered
recall (see also Henson et al., 2003). However, the results here,
along with others, suggest that ordinal information may be used to
perform sequence ordering and that participants may freely switch
between the use of different types of information about the timing
of a sequence (Brown et al., 2006, 2007; Lewandowsky et al., in
press). In particular, the results suggest that time is represented

A final finding of interest was a temporal isolation effect in
Experiment 3. That a temporal isolation effect was observed at all
is surprising, given repeated failures to find such an effect in the
serial recall task (Lewandowsky & Brown, 2005; Nimmo & Lewandowsky, 2005, 2006; Parmentier, King, & Dennis, 2006). One
possible explanation, in line with previous findings of apparent
temporal isolation effects (Lewandowsky & Brown, 2005), might
be that participants in Experiment 3 took advantage of the durations between items for additional rehearsal of the preceding item.
However, this would not explain the enhanced performance for
items preceded by longer durations, particularly in the grouped
condition. Another explanation for the difference between these
results and previous failures to observe temporal isolation effects
might be that the context of the experiment, in which participants
were sometimes required to attend to the timing of items, led
participants to attend more to the timing of items than in previous
experiments. This is an unlikely explanation, as Experiment 2, in
which attention to time was explicitly required, did not produce
any evidence of a temporal isolation effect. Similarly, Farrell and
McLaughlin (in press) failed to observe a temporal isolation effect
in a recognition experiment in which the type of information on
which the recognition decision was to be made, ordinal or temporal, was postcued. Indeed, the finding that a temporal isolation
effect was not observed when requiring participants to attend to
time, and was observed when attention to time was not required,

Conclusions

9
Neither of these possibilities accounts for the failure to observe coupling of input– output times in the experiments of Ng and Maybery (2002b)
and Maybery et al. (2002) and the grouped condition of Experiment 3 here,
all of which involved presentation of grouped lists. One speculative explanation, again in the framework of the SIMPLE model (Brown et al.,
2007), would be that weighting both a temporal within-list dimension and
an ordinal within-group dimension would result in minimal weighting
being given to duration information, except in cases in which that information will later be required for recall (Experiments 1 and 2). This
explanation is more speculative, however, as SIMPLE does not currently
account for the dynamics of recall (Farrell & Lewandowsky, 2004).
10
A planned experiment in our laboratory will test this suggestion by
replicating the serial recall trials of Experiment 3 in conditions where recall
of temporal information is never required.

FARRELL

144

both at the level of the entire sequence and at the level of individual durations (cf. Glenberg et al., 1989) and that this information may be incorporated into the dynamics of recall. The challenge for current models of short-term memory is to recognize
such flexibility while specifying in detail the mechanisms and
representations supporting such performance (cf. Lewandowsky et
al., in press); in particular, the data here emphasize the importance
of considering output times as constraining data on models of
serial recall (see also Farrell & Lewandowsky, 2004).

References
Anderson, J. R., & Matessa, M. (1997). A production system theory of
serial memory. Psychological Review, 104, 728 –748.
Baddeley, A. D. (1986). Working memory. New York: Oxford University
Press.
Bakeman, R., & McArthur, D. (1996). Picturing repeated measures: Comments on Loftus, Morrison, and others. Behavior Research Methods,
Instruments, & Computers, 28, 584 –589.
Boersma, P., & Weenink, D. (2006). Praat: Doing phonetics by computer
(Version 4.4.26) [Computer software]. Retrieved August 3, 2006, from
http://www.praat.org/
Brainard, D. H. (1997). The Psychophysics Toolbox. Spatial Vision, 10,
433– 436.
Brown, G. D. A., & Hulme, C. (1995). Modeling item length effects in
memory span: No rehearsal needed? Journal of Memory and Language,
34, 594 – 621.
Brown, G. D. A., Morin, C., & Lewandowsky, S. (2006). Evidence for
time-based models of free recall. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 13,
717–723.
Brown, G. D. A., Neath, I., & Chater, N. (2007). A temporal ratio model
of memory. Psychological Review, 114, 539 –576.
Brown, G. D. A., Preece, T., & Hulme, C. (2000). Oscillator-based memory for serial order. Psychological Review, 107, 127–181.
Burgess, N., & Hitch, G. J. (1999). Memory for serial order: A network
model of the phonological loop and its timing. Psychological Review,
106, 551–581.
Burgess, N., & Hitch, G. J. (2006). A revised model of short-term memory
and long-term learning of verbal sequences. Journal of Memory and
Language, 55, 627– 652.
Catalan, M. J., Honda, M., Weeks, R. A., Cohen, L. G., & Hallett, M.
(1998). The functional neuroanatomy of simple and complex sequential
finger movements: A PET study. Brain, 121, 253–264.
Collier, G. L., & Logan, G. (2000). Modality differences in short-term
memory for rhythms. Memory & Cognition, 28, 529 –538.
Cowan, N., Saults, J. S., & Brown, G. D. A. (2004). On the auditory
modality superiority effect in serial recall: Separating input and output
factors. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 30, 639 – 644.
Crowder, R. G., & Greene, R. L. (1987). On the remembrance of times
past: The irregular list technique. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
General, 116, 265–278.
Duncan, M., & Murdock, B. (2000). Recognition and recall with precuing
and postcuing. Journal of Memory and Language, 42, 301–313.
Elvevåg, B., Brown, G. D. A., McCormack, T., Vousden, J. I., & Goldberg,
T. E. (2004). Identification of tone duration, line length, and letter
position: An experimental approach to timing and working memory
deficits in schizophrenia. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 113, 509 –
521.
Estes, W. K. (1972). An associative basis for coding and organization in
memory. In A. W. Melton & E. Martin (Eds.), Coding processes in
human memory (pp. 161–190). Washington, DC: Winston.
Estes, W. K. (1985). Memory for temporal information. In J. A. Michon &

J. Jackson (Eds.), Time, mind and behavior (pp. 151–168). Berlin,
Germany: Springer-Verlag.
Estes, W. K. (1997). Processes of memory loss, recovery, and distortion.
Psychological Review, 104, 148 –169.
Farrell, S., & Lewandowsky, S. (2002). An endogenous distributed model
of ordering in serial recall. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 9, 59 –79.
Farrell, S., & Lewandowsky, S. (2004). Modeling transposition latencies:
Constraints for theories of serial order memory. Journal of Memory and
Language, 51, 115–135.
Farrell, S., & McLaughlin, K. (in press). Short-term recognition memory
for serial order and timing. Memory & Cognition.
Field, D. T., & Groeger, J. A. (2004). Temporal interval production and
short-term memory. Perception & Psychophysics, 66, 808 – 819.
Fortin, C., & Breton, R. (1995). Temporal interval production and processing in working memory. Perception & Psychophysics, 57, 203–215.
Fortin, C., & Massé, N. (1999). Order information in short-term memory
and time estimation. Memory & Cognition, 27, 54 – 62.
Fortin, C., & Rousseau, R. (1987). Time estimation as an index of processing demand in memory search. Perception & Psychophysics, 42,
377–382.
Fraisse, P. (1984). Perception and estimation of time. Annual Review of
Psychology, 35, 1–36.
Frankish, C. (1985). Modality-specific grouping effects in short-term memory. Journal of Memory and Language, 24, 200 –209.
Franssen, V., Vandierendonck, A., & Van Hiel, A. (2006). Duration
estimation and the phonological loop: Articulatory suppression and
irrelevant sounds. Psychological Research, 70, 304 –316.
Frick, R. W. (1989). Explanations of grouping in immediate ordered recall.
Memory & Cognition, 17, 551–562.
Glenberg, A. M., & Jona, M. (1991). Temporal coding in rhythm tasks
revealed by modality effects. Memory & Cognition, 19, 514 –522.
Glenberg, A. M., Mann, S., Altman, L., Forman, T., & Procise, S. (1989).
Modality effects in the coding and reproduction of rhythms. Memory &
Cognition, 17, 373–383.
Glenberg, A. M., & Swanson, N. G. (1986). A temporal distinctiveness
theory of recency and modality effects. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 12, 3–15.
Henson, R. N. A. (1996). Short-term memory for serial order. Unpublished
doctoral dissertation, University of Cambridge, England.
Henson, R. N. A. (1999). Coding position in short-term memory. International Journal of Psychology, 34, 403– 409.
Henson, R. N. A. (2005). What can functional neuroimaging tell the
experimental psychologist? Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 58A, 193–233.
Henson, R. N. A., Burgess, N., & Frith, C. D. (2000). Recoding, storage,
rehearsal and grouping in verbal short-term memory: An fMRI study.
Neuropsychologia, 38, 426 – 440.
Henson, R. N. A., Hartley, T., Burgess, N., Hitch, G., & Flude, B. (2003).
Selective interference with verbal short-term memory for serial order
information: A new paradigm and test of a timing-signal hypothesis.
Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 56A, 1307–1334.
Henson, R. N. A., Norris, D. G., Page, M. P. A., & Baddeley, A. D. (1996).
Unchained memory: Error patterns rule out chaining models of immediate serial recall. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 49A,
80 –115.
Hitch, G. J., Burgess, N., Towse, J. N., & Culpin, V. (1996). Temporal
grouping effects in immediate recall: A working memory analysis.
Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 49A, 116 –139.
Jones, D. M., Macken, W. J., & Nicholls, A. P. (2004). The phonological
store of working memory: Is it phonological and is it a store? Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 30, 656 –
674.
Jones, L. A., & Wearden, J. H. (2004). Double standards: Memory loading

TIMING AND ORDER MEMORY
in temporal reference memory. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 57B, 55–77.
Lee, C. L., & Estes, W. K. (1977). Order and position in primary memory
for letter strings. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 16,
395– 418.
Lewandowsky, S., & Brown, G. D. A. (2005). Serial recall and presentation schedule: A micro-analysis of local distinctiveness. Memory, 13,
283–292.
Lewandowsky, S., Brown, G. D. A., Wright, T., & Nimmo, L. M. (2006).
Timeless memory: Evidence against temporal distinctiveness models of
short-term memory for serial order. Journal of Memory and Language,
54, 20 –38.
Lewandowsky, S., & Farrell, S. (2000). A reintegration account of the
effects of speech rate, lexicality, and word frequency in immediate serial
recall. Psychological Research, 63, 163–173.
Lewandowsky, S., Nimmo, L. M., & Brown, G. D. A. (in press). When
temporal isolation benefits memory for serial order. Journal of Memory
and Language.
Livesey, A. C., Wall, M. B., & Smith, A. T. (2007). Time perception:
Manipulation of task difficulty dissociates clock functions from other
cognitive demands. Neuropsychologia, 45, 321–331.
Macken, W. J., & Jones, D. M. (2003). Reification of phonological storage.
Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 56A, 1279 –1288.
Maybery, M. T., Parmentier, F. B. R., & Jones, D. M. (2002). Grouping of
list items reflected in the timing of recall: Implications for models of
serial verbal memory. Journal of Memory and Language, 47, 360 –385.
Nairne, J. S. (1990). A feature model of immediate memory. Memory &
Cognition, 18, 251–269.
Nairne, J. S. (1992). The loss of positional certainty in long-term memory.
Psychological Science, 3, 199 –202.
Neath, I., & Fortin, C. (2005). Is the interference between memory processing and timing specific to the use of verbal material? Memory, 13,
395– 402.
Ng, H. L. H., & Maybery, M. T. (2002a). Grouping in short-term verbal
memory: Is position coded temporally? Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 55A, 391– 424.
Ng, H. L. H., & Maybery, M. T. (2002b). Grouping in verbal short-term
memory: Does latency of recall bear any relation to presentation rate?
Noetica. Retrieved March 27, 2007, from www2.psy.uq.edu.au/
CogPsych/Noetica/Articles/
Ng, H. L. H., & Maybery, M. T. (2005). Grouping in short-term memory:
Do oscillators code the positions of items? Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 31, 175–181.
Nicholls, A. P., & Jones, D. M. (2002). Capturing the suffix: Cognitive
streaming in immediate serial recall. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 28, 12–28.
Nimmo, L. M., & Lewandowsky, S. (2005). From brief gaps to very long
pauses: Temporal isolation does not benefit serial recall. Psychonomic
Bulletin & Review, 12, 999 –1004.
Nimmo, L. M., & Lewandowsky, S. (2006). Distinctiveness revisited:
Unpredictable temporal isolation does not benefit short-term serial recall
of heard or seen events. Memory & Cognition, 34, 1368 –1375.
Oberauer, K. (2003). Understanding serial position curves in short-term
recognition and recall. Journal of Memory and Language, 49, 469 – 483.
Page, M. P. A., & Norris, D. (1998). The primacy model: A new model of
immediate serial recall. Psychological Review, 105, 761–781.
Parmentier, F. B. R., Andrés, P., Elford, G., & Jones, D. M. (2006).
Organization of visuo-spatial serial memory: Interaction of temporal

145

order with spatial and temporal grouping. Psychological Research, 70,
200 –217.
Parmentier, F. B. R., & Jones, D. M. (2000). Functional characteristics of
auditory temporal–spatial short-term memory: Evidence from serial order errors. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 26, 222–238.
Parmentier, F. B. R., King, S., & Dennis, I. (2006). Local temporal
distinctiveness does not benefit auditory verbal and spatial serial recall.
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 13, 458 – 465.
Pelli, D. G. (1997). The video toolbox software for visual psychophysics:
Transforming numbers into movies. Spatial Vision, 10, 437– 442.
Pinheiro, J. C., & Bates, D. M. (2000). Mixed-effects models in S and
S-Plus. New York: Springer.
Ross, J., & Houtsma, A. J. M. (1994). Discrimination of auditory temporal
patterns. Perception & Psychophysics, 56, 19 –26.
Ryan, J. (1969a). Grouping and short-term memory: Different means and
patterns of grouping. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 21,
137–147.
Ryan, J. (1969b). Temporal grouping, rehearsal and short-term memory.
Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 21, 148 –155.
Saito, S. (2001). The phonological loop and memory for rhythms: An
individual differences approach. Memory, 9, 313–322.
Saito, S., & Ishio, A. (1998). Rhythmic information in working memory:
Effects of concurrent articulation on reproduction of rhythms. Japanese
Psychological Research, 40, 10 –18.
Schab, F. R., & Crowder, R. G. (1989). Accuracy of temporal coding:
Auditory–visual comparisons. Memory & Cognition, 17, 384 –397.
Scott, S. K. (1998). The point of P-centers. Psychological Research, 61,
4 –11.
Sorkin, R. D. (1990). Perception of temporal patterns defined by tonal
sequences. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 87, 1695–
1701.
Thomas, J. G., Milner, H. R., & Haberlandt, K. F. (2003). Forward and
backward recall: Different response time patterns, same retrieval order.
Psychological Science, 14, 169 –174.
Treisman, M., Cook, N., Naish, P. L. N., & MacCrone, J. K. (1994). The
internal clock: Electroencephalographic evidence for oscillatory processes underlying time perception. Quarterly Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 47A, 241–289.
Tubau, E., Hommel, B., & López-Moliner, J. (2007). Modes of executive
control in sequence learning: From stimulus-based to plan-based control.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 136, 43– 63.
Watkins, M. J., LeCompte, D. C., Elliott, M. N., & Fish, S. B. (1992).
Short-term memory for the timing of auditory and visual signals. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 18,
931–937.
Wearden, J. H., Edwards, M., & Fakhri, A. P. (1998). Why “sounds are
judged longer than lights”: Application of a model of the internal clock
in humans. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 51B, 97–
120.
Wearden, J. H., & Ferrara, A. (1993). Subjective shortening in humans’
memory for stimulus duration. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 46B, 163–186.

Received April 5, 2007
Revision received August 29, 2007
Accepted August 29, 2007 䡲

