Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition
2008, Vol. 34, No. 1, 80 –96

Copyright 2008 by the American Psychological Association
0278-7393/08/$12.00 DOI: 10.1037/0278-7393.34.1.80

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

An Attention-Based Associative Account of Adjacent and Nonadjacent
Dependency Learning
Sébastien Pacton

Pierre Perruchet

Université Paris Descartes and
Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique

Université de Bourgogne and
Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique

In 5 experiments, results showed that when participants are faced with materials embedding relations
between both adjacent and nonadjacent elements, they learn exclusively the type of relations they had to
actively process in order to meet the task demands, irrespective of the spatial contiguity of the paired
elements. These results are consonant with current theories positing that attention is a necessary condition
for learning. More important, the results provide support for a more radical conception, in which the joint
attentional processing of 2 events is also a sufficient condition for learning the relation between them. The
well-documented effect of contiguity could be a by-product of the fact that attention generally focuses
on contiguous events. This reappraisal considerably extends the scope of approaches based on associative
or statistical processes.
Keywords: attention, statistical computation, associative learning, language

ing relying on the formation of chunks of adjacent events have
proved to be especially successful in those situations (e.g., Perruchet, Vinter, Pacteau, & Gallego, 2002; Servan-Schreiber &
Anderson, 1990).
Several studies have shown that adjacent relations are far more
relevant for language acquisition than has been claimed in the past.
In a series of oft-cited experiments, Saffran, Newport, and Aslin
(1996) showed that the formation of the lexicon partly relied on
statistical relations between adjacent syllables. Moreover, Redington, Chater, and Finch (1998) showed that highly local context
provided a considerable amount of information about the syntactic
categories of words. However, linguistic structures also embed
remote dependencies. That is to say, a relation exists between two
events, A and C, irrespective of the intervening events (hereinafter,
this structure is referred to as AXC, where X stands for a variable
event, which is statistically independent of both A and C). Such
relations are found at different levels, from the subsyllabic level
(e.g., the short vs. long pronunciations of vowels according to the
presence of a “silent e” ending, irrespective of the intermediary
consonant, as in CAP–CAPE, CAR–CARE; Stanback, 1992) to
morphosyntactic relationships (e.g., between auxiliaries and inflectional morphemes, as in “is writing,” irrespective of the verb stem)
and hierarchical structures (e.g., in center-embedded sentences,
such as “the rat the cat ate stole the cheese”; Perruchet & Rey,
2005). Nonadjacent dependencies are also present in other domains of high-level knowledge, such as music. Likewise, capturing
the relationships between distant objects seems essential. As
claimed by Turk-Browne, Jungé, and Scholl (2005), “people are
constantly bombarded with noise in space and time that needs to be
segregated in order to extract a coherent representation of the
world, and people rarely encounter a sequence of relevant stimuli
without any interruptions” (p. 562).
In the past few years, this state of affairs has given rise to a set
of studies investigating the possibility of learning nonadjacent
dependencies in artificial languages (Bonatti, Peña, Nespor, &

The past 2 decades or so have been the theater of an attempt to
account for a growing number of higher cognitive activities in a
framework rooted in the notions of associative (or statistical)
learning. This line of research has been especially lively in language, where the so-called statistical/distributional approaches are
sometimes construed as viable alternatives to the more conventional rule-based perspective (e.g., Redington & Chater, 1998;
Seidenberg & MacDonald, 1999; for brief overviews, see Perruchet, 2005; Perruchet & Pacton, 2006).
By and large, such approaches have focused on the human
abilities to detect and exploit the relations between adjacent elements. This focus is consistent with the traditional literature on
associative learning. In considering the domain of animal conditioning, or studies on paired-associate learning in humans, we
observe that, in all cases, the items to be associated are displayed
in close temporal or spatial proximity. This is also true for the
more recent studies on implicit learning (e.g., Stadler & Frensch,
1998). For instance, the finite-state grammars that are commonly
used in artificial grammar studies govern relations between contiguous elements. As a consequence, the models of implicit learn-

Sébastien Pacton, Institut de Psychologie, Laboratoire de Psychologie et
Neurosciences Cognitives, Université Paris Descartes, Paris, France, and
Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, Paris, France; Pierre Perruchet, Laboratoire d’Etude de l’Apprentissage et du Développement /
Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, Université de Bourgogne,
Dijon, France.
This work was supported by the Centre National de la Recherche
Scientifique (CNRS; Formation de Recherche en Evolution [FRE] 2987
and Unité Mixte de Recherches 5022), the Université Paris Descartes, and
the Université de Bourgogne.
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Sébastien
Pacton, Institut de Psychologie, Laboratoire de Psychologie et Neurosciences Cognitives, Université Paris Descartes (CNRS, FRE-2987), 71
Avenue Edouard Vaillant, 92774, Boulogne-Billancourt, Cedex, France.
E-mail: sebastien.pacton@univ-paris5.fr
80

LEARNING NONADJACENT DEPENDENCY

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Mehler, 2005; Gómez, 2002; Newport & Aslin, 2004; Onnis,
Monaghan, Richmond, & Chater, 2005; Peña, Bonatti, Nespor, &
Mehler, 2002; Perruchet, Tyler, Galland, & Peereman, 2004),
music (Creel, Newport, & Aslin, 2004; Kuhn & Dienes, 2005), and
visual perception (Turk-Browne et al., 2005).1 The results show a
consensus on the conclusion that learning nonadjacent dependencies is possible, but under far more restrictive conditions than those
required for learning the relations between contiguous events. The
question to be debated is, What is the nature of these constraints?
More specifically, can these constraints be encompassed within a
general theory of associative learning, or are they specific enough
to suggest that learning adjacent and nonadjacent dependencies
constitutes radically different forms of learning?

An Overview of Earlier Studies
In an initial attempt to address the questions outlined above,
Gómez (2002) showed that, in a situation where the successive
AXC units were perceptually distinct, the degree to which the A_C
relationships were learned depended on the variability of the
middle element (X). More precisely, participants were presented
with 2, 6, 12, or 24 different X elements, and learning was
observed to increase markedly under conditions of greatest variability in both adults and infants (see also Gómez, 2006; Onnis,
Christiansen, Chater, & Gómez, 2003). According to Gómez,
when X is variable, the adjacent relations (i.e., AX and XC) are not
stable enough to be learned, and thus people shift their focus onto
the only stable relation available in the language, namely, that
between A and C.
For Creel, Newport, and Aslin (2004), the crucial factor is the
similarity between A and C, more precisely, the higher level of
similarity existing between A and C than between A (or C), on the
one hand, and X, on the other hand. Similarity can be assessed on
an acoustic dimension. Using musical tone sequences, Creel et al.
(2004) showed that nonadjacent dependencies were not acquired
when all of the elements differed equally one from one another,
whereas learning was successful when A and C were similar in
pitch or timbre, and different from X. The role of acoustic similarity was also emphasized by Onnis et al. (2005), who concluded
from their studies of artificial language that no learning was
obtained without some degree of phonological similarity between
A and C syllables. To account for their results, Newport and Aslin
(2004) invoked the perceptual grouping principles identified by
Gestalt psychologists and, notably, the law of similarity. In other
studies from the same laboratory, similarity was assessed in terms
of categorical classification. Newport and Aslin (2004) failed to
observe learning with nonadjacent syllables (i.e., A, X, and C were
syllables), whereas learning occurred when A and C were consonants and X was a vowel and, conversely, when A and C were
vowels and X was a consonant.
According to Bonatti et al. (2005), consonants and vowels do
not serve the same function in language, with consonants giving
cues about the lexicon and vowels being tied more closely to
syntax. Starting from the postulate that statistical analyses mainly
serve to build a lexicon, Bonatti et al. predicted that nonadjacent
relations between consonants would be learned, whereas nonadjacent relations between vowels would remain undetected. The authors provided some experimental support for their prediction.
This proposal suggests that the conditions allowing the learning of

81

nonadjacent dependencies are linked to language-specific features
and, thus, are different from the general purpose mechanisms
serving to discover the relations between contiguous events. Indeed, Peña et al. (2002) argued that a statistical or distributional
approach is unable to account for the discovery of nonadjacent
dependencies. As experimental support, Peña et al. showed that
this form of learning was only possible when short pauses were
introduced between the AXC words during the familiarization
phase. The role of these pauses, Peña et al. asserted, was to make
the speech stream more similar to natural language. By doing so,
the pauses trigger computational processes oriented toward the
discovery of the speech structure, which the authors argued are
entirely different from those involved in the discovery of statistical
patterns.
This brief overview leaves a somewhat fuzzy picture. Considering the different studies jointly suggests that none of the learning
conditions that have been a focus up until now may be taken as
decisive. For instance, the emphasis of Gómez (2002) and Onnis et
al. (2003) on the need for a highly variable intervening event is
challenged by the positive results obtained by other contributors,
who generally used only two or three different Xs (e.g., Newport
& Aslin, 2004; Perruchet et al., 2004). Likewise, the emphasis on
the learning of relationships between consonants (Bonatti et al.,
2005) or the need for pauses between A and C units cannot be
taken as universal prerequisites given the studies showing that
relations between vowels are learned as well and that pauses are
unnecessary (Newport & Aslin, 2004). As a consequence, the issue
of whether learning nonadjacent dependencies actually requires
conditions that are qualitatively different from those required for
learning adjacent dependencies remains an open question.

A Unitary View of Adjacent and Nonadjacent
Dependency Learning
The view proposed here is aimed at accounting for the learning
of both adjacent and nonadjacent dependencies within a unified
theoretical framework. Our framework relies heavily on the role of
attentional processes. Emphasizing the role of attention in associative learning is far from new. Although the initial theories of
conditioning mostly focused on the contiguity of the stimuli (Guthrie, 1930), a number of studies in the 1960s and 1970s showed that
contiguity was not sufficient to trigger the learning of associations.
Those studies led to the emergence of models centered on the need
for learners’ attentional involvement (e.g., Mackintosh, 1975).
Since then, empirical data suggesting that learning does not occur
without a minimal level of attention have accumulated, especially
in the area of implicit, nonintentional forms of learning, which has
1
Turk-Browne et al. (2005) reported successful learning of relationships
between visual shapes of a given color when the related items are interrupted by irrelevant items from another color stream. Turk-Browne et al.’s
study was not directly aimed at studying nonadjacent dependencies, and as
discussed by the authors, the results are only suggestive of the possibility
of what they called “interrupted statistical learning.” Indeed, the occurrence of the intervening events was randomly determined, hence occasionally allowing the presentation of relevant events in immediate succession.
However, a subsequent study by the same authors, currently published in
abstract form (Jungé, Turk-Browne, & Scholl, 2005), suggests that learning
persists when the “interrupting” elements are perfectly interleaved.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

82

PACTON AND PERRUCHET

been a primary focus of recent research (e.g., Frensch, Buchner, &
Lin, 1994; Hoffman & Sebald, 2005; Hsiao & Reber, 1998; Jimenez & Mendez, 1999; Whittlesea & Dorken, 1993). We consider
this research in more detail in the General Discussion. It is sufficient here to point out that all of these studies converge toward the
conclusion that attention is a necessary condition for learning.
Indeed, what is shown is that even when the objective conditions
that are, in principle, conducive to learning are fulfilled (especially
those concerning the contiguity of events), learning may fail to
occur whenever the learner’s attention is not focused on the
relevant events.
As such, a learning model positing the necessity of attention
remains unable to account for the learning of nonadjacent relations. Indeed, the need for attentional involvement does not preclude other conditions from being effective, especially those concerning the temporal or spatial adjacency of events. To account for
nonadjacent dependency learning within an attentional model, one
must postulate, in addition, that attention is a sufficient condition
for learning to occur. The claim that attention is a sufficient
condition means that no other condition is required, neither in
participants’ dispositions (such as their intention to learn) nor in
the external display (such as the spatial or temporal relationships
between events). Thus the critical postulate of our model is that the
joint attention given to a pair of events is a necessary and sufficient
condition for the emergence of associative learning and memory.
In line with this postulate, several authors have proposed that
associative learning is an automatic process that links together all
of the components that are present in the attentional focus at a
given point (Frensch & Miner, 1994; Logan & Etherton, 1994;
Perruchet & Vinter, 2002; Stadler, 1995; Treisman & Gelade,
1980). However, to the best of our knowledge, the potential of this
proposal to account for nonadjacent dependency learning has yet
to be exploited.
If the spatial or temporal contiguity of the relevant events is not
a mandatory condition for associative learning and memory, one
may wonder why this condition has received such considerable
(and once exclusive; see Guthrie, 1930) attention throughout the
past research on learning. It may be that, in an overwhelming
proportion of earlier associative learning studies, the objective
contiguity of the to-be-associated elements and the joint attentional
processing of those elements were confounded. For instance, in
standard classical conditioning studies, the conditioned and unconditioned stimuli were generally displayed within a temporal window of 500 ms or so, with a long blank interval between successive
pairings. In those conditions, there is no doubt that the two relevant
events are attentionally processed together, and this leaves open
the possibility that the causal factor was the joint attentional
processing, not the contiguity per se. More generally, the mental
content composing the attentional focus at a given moment has a
high chance of representing events that are close on spatial and/or
temporal dimensions in the environment. Certainly, the attentional
content may also encompass events that are not adjacent in the
environment, but some specific reasons are needed to pay joint
attention to those events. Thus, our attention-based view accounts
for both the easy formation of associations between contiguous
events (those events are generally represented as mental chunks)
and the far more limited ability to build associations between
nonadjacent events (the joint attentional processing of those events
requires some special conditions). In this view, the conditions

promoting learning nonadjacent dependencies are the same as
those that allow the joint attentional processing of the relevant
events.
This theoretical proposal appears to be compatible with the
available findings on nonadjacent dependency learning. For instance, the variability of the intervening event (X) may draw
participants’ attention toward the repeated elements (A and C) as
a result of their relative frequencies, hence favoring the discovery
of their relations, as observed by Gómez (2002)2 and Onnis et al.
(2003). The factors revealed in the studies by Creel et al. (2004)
and Newport and Aslin (2004; see also Onnis et al., 2005) originally accounted for by reference to the Gestalt law of similarity,
may also be encompassed in a view centered on attentional processing. Indeed, as has been occasionally suggested (e.g., Driver &
Baylis, 1998; Scholl, 2001), an equivalent claim could be made
that an array of elements forms a perceptual group, as defined by
the traditional Gestalt principles, with the assertion that attention
automatically spreads across those elements, hence integrating
them within a single chunk. More indirectly, an attention-based
interpretation is also consistent with Peña et al.’s (2002) data.
Indeed, Peña et al. failed to observe learning when the AXC words
were played as an unbroken stream, whereas successful learning of
nonadjacent dependencies was obtained when the speech stream
was perceived as a succession of AXC words (as shown in Perruchet et al., 2004). Without pauses between the AXC units, there
is no reason to jointly focus on A and C rather than on any other
subset of syllables. By contrast, when participants perceive the
auditory stream as a succession of AXC words, they pay more
attention to the first and last syllables than to the intervening ones,
because the start and the end of a sequence capture more attention
than do the intermediary events (e.g., Cowan, 1991).

The Present Study
The fact that, by and large, an attention-based model of associative learning is able to provide an a posteriori account for earlier
results provides only partial support for the model. This is especially true given that the nature of the features likely to capture
attention is open to debate, and there is a risk of circularly defining
these features as those that promote associative learning. Stronger
evidence would be provided if one were able to draw new predictions from our model. It is worth noting in this context that
attention can be captured by the intrinsic features of the environment but can also be internally driven. That is to say, attention can
be oriented toward adjacent or nonadjacent aspects of the very
same physical display as a function of task demands. This property
allows original predictions, as is illustrated after a brief outline of
our experimental approach.
2

Gómez (2002) also conferred a role to attention, but in a different way.
Indeed, Gómez assumed that attentional processes are captured by a stable
relation. This means that detecting the stability of the relation is a prerequisite for this relation to fall into the focus of attention. Note, however, that
Gómez’s interpretation leaves open the question of the mechanisms allowing the detection of stable relations, which may be thought of as the
hallmark of learning. By contrast, we assume that certain events capture
attention, for instance, because of their intrinsic properties, with the detection of their relations being a by-product of the joint attentional processing
of those events.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

LEARNING NONADJACENT DEPENDENCY

83

In the experiments described below, participants were faced
with a set of problems, each consisting of a sequence of digits
embedding both adjacent and nonadjacent regularities. The participants’ task involved (a) the sequential processing of each individual digit of the sequence and (b) the joint processing of two
selected digits. These two digits were adjacent for a first group of
participants and nonadjacent for a second group. A subsequent
recognition test explored how well participants from the two
groups learned both adjacent and nonadjacent dependencies. The
predictions of different theories are represented in Table 1. We
reasoned as follows: If learning depends exclusively on the contiguity between elements, then participants should learn adjacent
relations, irrespective of the task they have to perform. If learning
depends on both attention and contiguity, then participants should
learn only adjacent relations in the condition in which the task
demand leads to a focus on those relations. This second possibility
would be consistent with the prevalent associative learning theories, which posit that attention is necessary without concurrently
relaxing the condition of contiguity. Finally, if learning depends
exclusively on attention, irrespective of the objective relations
between elements, then participants would learn adjacent relations
when they focus on adjacent relations and nonadjacent relations
when they focus on nonadjacent relations. In other words, when
contiguity and attention are manipulated orthogonally, participants
should learn the relations between the elements on which they focus to meet the task demand, irrespective of their objective contiguity. Our hypothesis was in keeping with this third possibility.

Experiment 1
In Experiment 1, participants were presented with a set of 20
problems. Each problem consisted of a digit on the left, which
indicated the target for this problem, followed by a sequence of 20
digits. Each sequence consisted of two occurrences of an adjacent
dependency (e.g., the digit 4 systematically followed the digit 6)
and two occurrences of a nonadjacent dependency (e.g., the digit
7 systematically followed the digit 3, with a variable digit intervening between the digits 3 and 7). An example of a sequence is:
5 8 5 6 4 3 9 7 1 0 8 6 4 9 3 0 7 2 2 1 (see Figure 1). Participants
had to browse the 20-digit sequences, from left to right, in order to
detect the targets. When participants detected a target, they had to

Table 1
Predictions of Three Theoretical Models of Learning
Relations assessed during
the recognition test

Contiguity
only

Contiguity
plus attention

Attention
only

Adjacent
Nonadjacent

Adjacent task-induced attention
⫹
⫹
⫺
⫺

⫹
⫺

Adjacent
Nonadjacent

Nonadjacent task-induced attention
⫹
⫺
⫺
⫺

⫺
⫹

Note. The table shows predictions of three theoretical models of learning
as a function of whether the task focuses participants’ attention on adjacent
or nonadjacent dependencies. A plus sign indicates that learning should
occur, and a minus sign indicates that learning should not occur.

Figure 1. Examples of problems used in the three experiments. Each
problem was formed with one target digit on the left, within a rectangle,
and one 20-digit sequence on the right: (a) three problems used in Experiment 1, adjacent task; (b) three problems used in Experiments 1, 3, 4a, and
4b, nonadjacent task; and (c) three problems used in Experiment 2 nonadjacent task. In all of these examples, the adjacent regularity was 64, and
the nonadjacent regularity was 3X7.

calculate the difference between two digits, either the two digits
that immediately followed the target or the two digits that immediately surrounded the target. All of the participants had to circle
the target and the two digits they had to subtract from each other
when the absolute value of their difference equaled three. It is
worth noting that participants never had to circle the elements
forming the adjacent and nonadjacent dependencies, as neither the
difference between 6 and 4 nor the difference between 3 and 7
equals 3 (or ⫺3). After this study phase, the same recognition test
was used in the two groups to assess the learning of both adjacent
and nonadjacent dependencies.
An attention-based model predicts an interaction between the
type of dependency and the task demand. Indeed, adjacent
dependencies, but not nonadjacent dependencies, should be
learned when participants have to process adjacent items,
whereas the reverse is expected when participants have to
process nonadjacent items. Note that this pattern of results
cannot be attributed to intrinsic properties of the material, as the
material included the very same dependencies for all of the
participants.

84

PACTON AND PERRUCHET

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Method
Participants. A total of 192 undergraduate students from the
Université Paris Descartes, Paris, France, participated in the experiment in partial fulfillment of a course requirement. All participants were native French speakers. Participants were randomly
assigned to one of the four Dependency Type ⫻ Digit Combination experimental groups (n ⫽ 48 for each group).
Materials. The stimuli used in the study phase consisted of 20
problems composed of a target digit inside a rectangle on the left
(which indicated the value of the target for this problem) and a
sequence of 20 digits on the right (see Figure 1). In every sequence, (a) each of the 10 digits (0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9) occurred
twice, (b) a pair of digits forming an adjacent dependency (e.g.,
64) occurred twice, and (c) a pair of digits forming a nonadjacent
dependency (e.g., 3X7) occurred twice. The adjacent and nonadjacent pairs were identical for all of the problems presented to a
given participant. For each problem, the target digit was selected
randomly among the digits 0, 1, 2, 5, 8, and 9, that is, those digits
that were not elements of the pairs forming the adjacent and
nonadjacent dependencies. When the task involved a subtraction
between adjacent digits, the target digit occurred once just before
one of the two pairs of digits forming an adjacent dependency and
once in another position. When the task involved a subtraction
between nonadjacent digits, the target digit occurred once between
the two pairs of digits forming a nonadjacent dependency and once
in another position. Figure 1a shows three problems with the
adjacent pair 64, and with the nonadjacent pair 3X7, when the task
consisted in deciding whether the difference between the two
digits following the target digit equals three (this is the case for the
second problem in which the digits 8 and 5 follow the target 1).
Figure 1b shows three problems with the adjacent pair 64, and with
the nonadjacent pair 3X7, when the task consists in deciding
whether the difference between the two digits surrounding the
target digit equals three (this is the case for the second problem in
which the digits 4 and 1 surround the target 2).
For each participant, a set of 20 problems was generated. For
each problem, the value of the target digit, the position of the two
pairs forming the adjacent dependency, the position of the two
pairs forming the nonadjacent dependency, and the position of the
residual digits were determined randomly. Different randomizations were used for each participant. This led to the construction of
192 different sets of 20 problems. For half of the problems, the
adjacent dependencies were 64 and the nonadjacent dependencies
were 3X7, and for the other half, the adjacent dependencies were
37 and the nonadjacent dependencies were 6X4. Each of the 192
sets of 20 problems was printed in Verdana font, size 12, on a
single A4 sheet of paper (21.0 ⫻ 29.7 cm). The distances were 1.5
cm between the target digit inside the rectangle and the first digit
of the sequence and 0.7 cm between two successive digits of the
sequence. There was a distance of 1.0 cm between two successive
problems.
A two-choice recognition test was used to assess participants’
learning of adjacent and nonadjacent dependencies. The stimuli
used in this test consisted of 16 pairs of three-digit strings. Each
pair contained a legal string and an illegal string. Eight pairs were
used to assess the learning of adjacent dependencies. For the
participants who were exposed to 64 as the adjacent dependency
and 3X7 as the nonadjacent dependency during the study phase, the

legal string was 64X for four pairs and X64 for four other pairs.
The illegal string resulted from a spacing violation in four pairs
6X4 and from an order violation in four other pairs 46X or X46.
Eight other pairs were used to assess the learning of nonadjacent
dependencies. The legal string was 3X7 for the eight pairs. The
illegal string resulted from a spacing violation in four pairs 37X or
X37 and from an order violation in four other pairs 7X3. Pairs were
elaborated on the basis of the same principle for the participants
who were exposed to the opposite digit combination, that is, 37 as
the adjacent dependency and 6X4 as the nonadjacent dependency
during the study phase. The digit X was always selected randomly
among the six digits used as target digits in the study phase (0, 1,
2, 5, 8, 9). The digit X was the same in the legal string and in the
illegal string of a pair (e.g., 640 – 604; 387 – 378). For each
participant, the 16 pairs of three-digit strings were printed in
Verdana font, size 12, on a single A4 sheet of paper. The distances
were 0.7 cm between two successive digits of a sequence and 2.0 cm
between the third digit of the left string and the first digit of the right
string of a pair. There was a distance of 1.5 cm between two pairs.
Procedure. The experiment was carried out with groups of 15
to 20 participants. In the study phase, the participants were provided with the sheet of paper containing the 20 problems. Participants were asked to look for the target digit within each sequence
of 20 digits while going through the sequence from left to right.
They were informed that the target digit could occur more than
once within a sequence. At this point, half of the participants were
asked to calculate whether the absolute value of the difference
between the two digits following the target digit equaled 3 (i.e.,
was ⫹3 or ⫺3), a task that entails the processing of two adjacent
digits. The other half of the participants were asked to calculate
whether the absolute difference between the two digits surrounding the target digit equaled 3, a task that entails the processing of
two nonadjacent digits. The two groups had to circle the target and
the two digits when this condition was fulfilled (this condition was
fulfilled in at least two problems for each participant). The participants were not informed that they would have to perform a
recognition test after the study phase. Completing the 20 problems
of the study phase usually took less than 10 min.
After this task, the sheets of paper used in the study phase were
withdrawn and replaced by those for the recognition test. All of the
participants, regardless of the group to which they were assigned,
were asked to select which of two strings of three digits was part
of the digit sequences viewed in the study phase of the experiment.
Participants were told that they had to make a choice for each of
the 16 pairs, even if they sometimes felt that they were guessing.

Results
Figure 2 shows the mean percentage of correct responses in the
recognition test for items evaluating the learning of adjacent and
nonadjacent dependencies as a function of the task performed during
the study phase. An analysis of variance (ANOVA) was performed on
the number of correct responses, with type of subtraction (subtraction
between adjacent digits vs. subtraction between nonadjacent digits)
and digit combination (the adjacent pair 64 and the nonadjacent pair
3X7 vs. the adjacent pair 37 and the nonadjacent pair 6X4) as
between-subjects variables and dependency type (adjacent vs. nonadjacent) as a within-subject variable. In this and subsequent experiments, any effect with p ⬍ .10 is reported.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

LEARNING NONADJACENT DEPENDENCY

85

Figure 2. Mean percentage of correct responses (and standard error of the mean) for items evaluating the
learning of adjacent and nonadjacent dependencies as a function of the task performed during the study phase
in Experiment 1. Group 1 (gr.1) was presented with the adjacent pair 64 and the nonadjacent pair 3X7, and Group
2 (gr.2) was presented with the adjacent pair 37 and the nonadjacent pair 6X4.

Only the Type of Subtraction ⫻ Dependency Type interaction
was significant, F(1, 188) ⫽ 141.75, p ⬍ .01, MSE ⫽ 2.37, ␩2p ⫽
.43 (where ␩2p represents partial eta squared). This interaction
resulted from the fact that the type of dependencies learned varied
as a function of the study task. Planned analyses showed that
participants who subtracted adjacent digits during the study phase
performed better on items evaluating adjacent dependency learning than on items evaluating nonadjacent dependency learning,
F(1, 94) ⫽ 50.70, p ⬍ .01, MSE ⫽ 2.66, ␩2p ⫽ .35. Analyses
conducted with t tests indicated that the performance of such
participants was above chance level for items evaluating the learning of adjacent dependencies (M ⫽ 71.74, SE ⫽ 1.61), t(95) ⫽
10.85, p ⬍ .01, but did not differ from chance for items evaluating
the learning of nonadjacent dependencies (M ⫽ 50.78, SE ⫽ 1.69),
t(95) ⫽ 0.36, p ⫽ .72. By contrast, participants who subtracted
nonadjacent digits performed better on items evaluating nonadjacent dependency learning than on items evaluating adjacent dependency learning, F(1, 94) ⫽ 98.52, p ⬍ .01, MSE ⫽ 2.07, ␩2p ⫽
.51. These participants performed above chance level for items
evaluating the learning of nonadjacent dependencies (M ⫽ 70.83,
SE ⫽ 1.74), t(95) ⫽ 10.28, p ⬍ .01. Somewhat surprisingly, the
performance on items evaluating the learning of adjacent dependencies (M ⫽ 45.05, SE ⫽ 1.48) was slightly, but significantly,
below chance level, t(95) ⫽ ⫺2.57, p ⫽ .012.
A final analysis compared the level of performance for adjacent
and nonadjacent dependencies when participants’ processing was
triggered by the task instructions. The scores were 71.74 and
70.83, respectively, which did not differ significantly, t(190) ⫽
0.31, p ⫽ .75. This means that when participants were asked to
process two nonadjacent items, they learned their relations as well
as they learned the relations between two adjacent items when they
were asked to process adjacent items.

Discussion
Experiment 1 compared the learning of adjacent and nonadjacent dependencies by participants who performed a task requiring
either the processing of adjacent elements or the processing of
nonadjacent elements. Participants who focused on adjacent elements learned adjacent dependencies but did not learn nonadjacent
dependencies. As shown in Table 1, this result was expected
irrespective of whether contiguity and/or attention is construed as
the causal factor. The crucial results concerned the performance of
the participants who focused on nonadjacent dependencies. First, it
appears that these participants learned nonadjacent dependencies.
It is noteworthy that the recognition score of these participants was
not significantly lower than the recognition score on adjacent
dependencies reached by the participants who focused on adjacent
dependencies. As illustrated in Table 1, only a model positing that
attention is a necessary and sufficient condition for learning made
this prediction. Second, there was no evidence for adjacent dependencies learning when the participants in the nonadjacent dependencies group were not in the attentional focus. This learning
failure occurred despite the fact that (a) adjacent dependencies
(e.g., 64 for half of the participants) were displayed twice within
each problem (and hence 40 times on the whole study phase) and
(b) the target searching task ensured that each digit of the sequences was individually processed. This result runs counter to
any models focusing on event contiguity, whether contiguity is
considered in isolation or in conjunction with attention.
Thus, overall, these results support the idea that the type of
dependencies that are learned crucially hinges on the elements on
which participants have focused during the study phase to meet the
task demand. There was no evidence that the objective adjacency

PACTON AND PERRUCHET

86

of the events in the display played any role in and of itself when
attentional factors were controlled.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Experiment 2
Experiment 2 explored whether the prior results obtained by the
participants asked to process nonadjacent events could be replicated in a still more stringent condition. In summary, each problem
used in Experiment 1 included two occurrences of the nonadjacent
pairs (e.g., 3X7). However, the task requirement ensured the attentional processing of only one of the two occurrences. For
instance, in our example, the target was displayed only once
between 3 and 7 within a problem. One may wonder what role, if
any, was served by the 3X7 sequence in which X was not the target.
In Experiment 2, the problems were the same as those of
Experiment 1, except that the nonadjacent dependency occurred
only once per problem instead of twice. In this case, the target
always served as the intervening event. To prevent any frequency
bias in the sequence, the individual digits forming the nonadjacent
dependency were nevertheless displayed twice (as any other digits
in the 0 –9 range), but on their second occurrence, they were
displayed in random locations in the sequence.
The consequences of this change on the statistical properties of the
materials are straightforward. Indeed, the change decreased (in fact
halved) the frequency of the nonadjacent relations. Moreover, the
decoupled presentation of the elements composing the dependency
decreased their contingency, and contingency has been shown to be
crucial for associative learning (e.g., Perruchet & Peereman, 2004).
For instance, each of the digits composing the relevant association
may become associated with other digits when they are displayed in
isolation, hence generating competition and interference.
However, an attentional theory of associative learning does not
predict a difference between Experiments 1 and 2. Indeed, the
exposure to the AXC sequence when X is not the target (in

Experiment 1) should have no positive effect on the learning of the
A_C relationships, and likewise, the exposure to the decoupled A
and C components (in Experiment 2) should have no detrimental
effect, given that, in each case, the joint processing of the A and C
elements was not required by the task instructions.

Method
Participants. A total of 96 undergraduate students from the
Université Paris Descartes participated in the experiment in partial
fulfillment of a course requirement. All participants were native
French speakers. Participants were randomly assigned to one of the
two digit combination experimental groups (n ⫽ 48).
Materials and procedure. The stimuli and the procedure of
Experiment 2, including digit combination, were identical to those
of Experiment 1, with the following exceptions: First, all of the
participants received the instructions to process nonadjacent digits.
Second, in each problem, the AXC sequence occurred only once,
with X matching the target in each case. The A and C digits were
also displayed once each as decoupled events. Their location in the
sequence was randomly determined, with a different randomization for each problem and each participant.
Figure 1c shows three problems, with the adjacent pair 64, which
occurred twice; the nonadjacent pair 3X7, which occurred once; and
the digits forming the nonadjacent pair (3 and 7) displayed in random
locations in the sequence, to prevent any frequency bias.

Results
Figure 3 shows the mean percentage of correct responses on the
recognition test for items involving adjacent and nonadjacent
dependencies. An ANOVA was performed on these data, with
digit combination (64 and 3X7 vs. 37 and 6X4) as a betweensubjects variable and type of dependency (adjacent vs. nonadja-

Figure 3. Mean percentage of correct responses (and standard error of the mean) on the recognition test for
items evaluating the learning of adjacent and nonadjacent dependencies for the two groups of participants in
Experiment 2. Group 1 (gr.1) was presented with the adjacent pair 64 and the nonadjacent pair 3X7, and Group
2 (gr.2) was presented with the adjacent pair 37 and the nonadjacent pair 6X4.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

LEARNING NONADJACENT DEPENDENCY

cent) as a within-subject variable. The type of dependency had a
significant effect, F(1, 94) ⫽ 54.44, p ⬍ .01, MSE ⫽ 2.96, ␩2p ⫽
.37, with correct responses occurring more frequently on the items
involving nonadjacent dependencies (M ⫽ 70.83, SE ⫽ 1.90) than
on the items involving adjacent dependencies (M ⫽ 47.92, SE ⫽
1.51). The digit combination variable was marginally significant,
F(1, 94) ⫽ 3.57, p ⫽ .062, MSE ⫽ 2.34, ␩2p ⫽ .04, with correct
responses occurring more frequently for the digit combination 64
and 3X7 (M ⫽ 61.98, SE ⫽ 3.56) than for the digit combination 37
and 6X4 (M ⫽ 56.77, SE ⫽ 3.16). There was no Digit Combination ⫻ Type of Dependency interaction (F ⬍ 0.70). Performance
was above chance for nonadjacent dependencies, t(95) ⫽ 9.36, p ⬍
.01, whereas performance did not differ significantly from chance
level for the adjacent dependencies, t(95) ⫽ ⫺1.07, p ⫽ .29.

Discussion
Experiment 2 successfully confirmed the main conclusion of Experiment 1. First, participants who performed a task leading them to
focus on nonadjacent digits learned nonadjacent dependencies. This
result was obtained despite the fact that the nonadjacent dependency
occurred only once in each problem and despite the decoupled presentation of the digits composing this dependency elsewhere in the
sequences. It is worth noting that performances were very close to the
corresponding results of Experiment 1,3 in which the nonadjacent
dependency occurred twice. This indicates that whether the A and C
digits are displayed in their AXC format is inconsequential whenever
X is not a target. Second, participants failed to learn adjacent dependencies. Taken together, these results are all the more striking, as
nonadjacent dependencies were presented half as frequently as adjacent dependencies. The results strongly strengthen the view that the
crucial factor in associative learning is the attentional processing of
the stimuli during the study phase and not the objective contiguity of
the events.

Experiment 3
Do the results reported in Experiments 1 and 2 persist over a
transfer procedure? In the prior experiments, the intervening digits
in the nonadjacent dependencies used during the test phase were
the same as those seen during the study phase. This procedure has
been used in prior studies (e.g., Gómez, 2002) and is commonly
considered as providing a valid measure of nonadjacent dependency learning. However, as noted above, we defined nonadjacent
dependency learning as the learning of the relation between two
events, A and C, irrespective of the intervening events (X). The test
used up until now does not fit exactly with this definition, because
it is possible that performance improvement is conditioned on the
use of the specific intervening events that were seen during the
study phase. For instance, the possibility exists that participants
simply memorized the AXC strings of digits as a whole, without
extracting the A_C relations. To rule out this hypothesis, a transfer
situation is needed, in which the X events seen in the test phase
differ from the X events seen in the study phase. Prior studies have
shown that such a change may have dramatic effects on performance. For instance, in Peña et al. (2002), the conditions promoting learning when the same intervening events were used in the
study and test phases turned out to be no longer efficient when a
transfer test was involved (but see Perruchet et al., 2004).

87

In Experiment 3, we explored the extent to which participants
whose task leads them to focus on nonadjacent elements truly
learned the association between disjoint elements, irrespective of
the intervening events. The study task was the same as in Experiment 2, except that the target of the problems given to a participant could take only three values instead of six; hence, the X events
seen in the test phase could differ from the X events seen in the
study phase. In the recognition test, the digit intervening between
two nonadjacent digits of a legal three-digit string was one of the
three digits used as the target in the study phase for half of the test
items (familiar test items). In the other half, one of the other three
digits that were not used as target in the study phase (transfer test
items) served this role. If participants have learned the association
between nonadjacent digits irrespective of the digit embedded
between these two nonadjacent digits, their performance should
remain above chance level for transfer items. By contrast, if
participants have simply memorized AXC strings of digits, their
performance should be significantly above chance level for the
familiar items (as observed in Experiments 1 and 2) but should not
differ from chance for transfer items.

Method
Participants. A total of 160 undergraduate students from the
Université Paris Descartes participated in the experiment in partial
fulfillment of a course requirement. All participants were native
French speakers. Participants were randomly assigned to one of the
four Target ⫻ Digit Combination experimental groups (n ⫽ 40).
Materials. The problems used in the study phase of Experiment 3 were identical to the problems used in Experiment 1, with
the exception that the target value of the problems given to a
participant could take only three values. The target was randomly
selected among the digits 0, 2, and 9 for half of the participants and
among the digits 1, 5, and 8 for the other half. The target occurred
once between the two pairs of digits forming the nonadjacent
dependency and once in another, randomly determined, position.
Different randomizations were used for each participant, leading to
the construction of 160 different sets of 20 problems. Each of the
160 sets was printed on one A4 sheet of paper.
The recognition test used in Experiment 3 was the same as that
used in Experiments 1 and 2, with one exception that enabled the
creation of two categories of items. The digit X was selected
randomly from among the three digits used as target digits in the
study phase for one half of the test items involving adjacent
dependencies and for one half of the test items involving nonadjacent dependencies (familiar items). The digit X was selected
randomly among the three digits that were not used as target digits
in the study for the other half of the test items evaluating the
learning of adjacent dependencies and for the other half of the test
items evaluating the learning of nonadjacent dependencies (transfer items). As in Experiments 1 and 2, the same digit X was used
3
An ANOVA was performed on the correct responses, with experiment
(Experiment 1—in which participants asked for the processing of nonadjacent digits only—vs. Experiment 2) and digit combination (64 and 3X7
vs. 37 and 6X4) as between-subjects variables and type of dependency
(adjacent vs. nonadjacent) as a within-subject variable. The results indicated no main effect of experiment and no significant interactions for any
of the four interactions involving this variable (all Fs ⬍ 0.59).

88

PACTON AND PERRUCHET

in the legal string and in the illegal string of a test pair (e.g., 640
– 604; 387 – 378). For each participant, the 16 pairs of three-digit
strings were printed on one A4 sheet of paper.
Procedure. The procedure used in Experiment 3 was the same
as that used in Experiments 1 and 2.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Results
Figure 4 shows the mean percentage of correctly selected test
items evaluating the learning of adjacent dependencies, the learning of nonadjacent dependencies evaluated with the familiar test
items, and the learning of nonadjacent dependencies evaluated
with the transfer test items.
An initial analysis contrasted the learning of adjacent and nonadjacent dependencies, as in the prior experiments. The ANOVA
included digit combination (64 and 3X7 vs. 37 and 6X4) and target
(sample 0, 2, 9 vs. sample 1, 5, 8) as between-subjects variables
and type of dependency (adjacent vs. nonadjacent) as a withinsubject variable. The number of correct responses differed only as
a function of the type of dependency, F(1, 156) ⫽ 102.47, p ⬍ .01,
MSE ⫽ 2.27, ␩2p ⫽ .40, with better performance on items involving
nonadjacent dependencies (M ⫽ 70.70, SE ⫽ 1.30) than on items
involving adjacent dependencies (M ⫽ 49.38, SE ⫽ 0.93). Performance was above chance level for the items involving nonadjacent
dependencies, t(159) ⫽ 12.98, p ⬍ .01, whereas performance did
not differ from chance level for the items involving adjacent
dependencies, t(159) ⫽ 0.52, p ⫽ .60.

A second analysis examined the effect of transfer on nonadjacent dependencies. This ANOVA included digit combination (3X7
vs. 6X4) and target (sample 0, 2, 9 vs. sample 1, 5, 8) as betweensubjects variables and type of intervening digit (familiar vs. transfer) as a within-subject variable. Only the type of intervening digit
was significant, F(1, 156) ⫽ 18.01, p ⬍ .01, MSE ⫽ 0.83, ␩2p ⫽
.10, with correct responses occurring more frequently on familiar
items than on transfer items. Notably, however, performance was
above chance level for both familiar items (M ⫽ 76.09, SE ⫽
1.46), t(159) ⫽ 13.75, p ⬍ .01, and transfer items (M ⫽ 65.31,
SE ⫽ 1.87), t(159) ⫽ 7.09, p ⬍ .01.

Discussion
First, Experiment 3 again replicated the results observed in
Experiments 1 and 2, showing that participants who were asked to
perform a task that leads them to focus on nonadjacent digits
learned nonadjacent dependencies but did not learn adjacent dependencies. Second, this experiment showed that performance in
the test of nonadjacent dependencies remained above chance level
when the digit intervening between two nonadjacent digits of a
legal three-digit string was not a digit used as a target in the study
phase. Even though performance was poorer with these unfamiliar
items than with familiar items, this finding provides especially
compelling evidence that genuine learning of the A_C relationships occurred in this situation.

Figure 4. Mean percentage of correct responses (and standard error of the mean) as a function of the type of
items used to assess the learning of adjacent and nonadjacent dependencies for the four groups of participants
in Experiment 3. Group 1 (0, 2, 9) was presented with the adjacent pair 64, the nonadjacent pair 3X7, and the
target digit 0, 2, or 9; Group 1 (1, 5, 8) was presented with the adjacent pair 64, the nonadjacent pair 3X7, and
the target digit 1, 5, or 8; Group 2 (0, 2, 9) was presented with the adjacent pair 37, the nonadjacent pair 6X4,
and the target digit 0, 2, or 9; and Group 2 (1, 5, 8) was presented with the adjacent pair 37, the nonadjacent pair
6X4, and the target digit 1, 5, or 8. gr.1 ⫽ Group 1; gr.2 ⫽ Group 2.

LEARNING NONADJACENT DEPENDENCY

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Experiments 4a and 4b
Taken together, Experiments 1 through 3 show that when participants are faced with stimuli embedding relations between both
adjacent and nonadjacent elements, they learn exclusively the type
of relation they had to actively process in order to meet the task
demands, irrespective of the spatial contiguity of the paired elements. The learning score for nonadjacent dependencies when the
task required the processing of adjacent digits (Experiment 1) and,
more crucially, the learning score for the adjacent dependencies
when the task required the processing of nonadjacent digits (Experiments 1, 2, and 3) were never above chance level.
A postulate underpinning these experiments was that all individual items are processed. If some items were not actually processed, the observed failure of participants to learn their relations
would be trivial. Up until now, we have taken for granted that the
processing of all individual items occurred, because participants
had to scan the digit strings in order to detect the target. However,
this postulate can be challenged.4
First, it is possible that participants quickly discover that each
problem includes two, and only two, targets. Once participants
have processed the second target, they might stop scanning the
digit string to move on to the next one. Note that, although this
possibility can hardly be ruled out, its consequences on our line of
argumentation would be limited. If participants had decided to stop
scanning the sequences after the second target, they would have
been exposed to only a part of the materials. However, this remains
substantial (namely, two thirds of each digit string, on average, for
the digit strings occurring after the point in the session where
participants noticed that there were two targets per problem), and
it provides an unbiased sample of the whole strings (notably with
regard to the type of displayed dependency).
Another, a priori more devastating possibility, is that the target
pops out from the digit strings, without any of the other digits
actually being scanned. This possibility is suggested by experiments in visual-search tasks: Typically, participants are asked to
search for a line segment of which the orientation differs from the
common orientation of the surrounding distractors. In this situation, the detection time is independent of the number of distractors,
a result suggesting that the display was processed at a preattentive
level (Treisman & Gelade, 1980).
At least two reasons militate against this alternative explanation.
First, it has been suggested that the early conclusion according to
which the distractors in a standard visual-search task were processed at a preattentive level may have been an overstatement,
with a more appropriate conclusion being that they received relatively little attention (e.g., Joseph, Chun, & Nakayama, 1997).
Second, our procedure differs strikingly from the standard situations used to investigate the pop-out phenomenon. In particular, in
our task, the targets differed from one sequence to the next, and the
same digits were used alternatively as target and distractor across
trials. This makes the possibility that the nontarget digits were
processed at a preattentive level somewhat unlikely (e.g. Ahissar
& Hochstein, 1996). However, it remains possible that the digits
that were not involved in the subtraction task were processed very
cursorily and, crucially, faster than the digits that had to be
subtracted from one another. If the amount of time allocated to two
task-irrelevant digits was shorter than that allocated to the joint
processing of two task-relevant digits, then the relevant factor

89

could be the overall duration of processing rather than the fact of
processing jointly, instead of separately, the two events at hand.
In two additional experiments, we investigated whether our results
could be replicated using a task that ensures a more extensive processing of the items not involved in the subtraction task. Experiments
4a and 4b presented the same problems as in Experiment 3, but the
sequence of digits appeared progressively, from left to right, instead
of being displayed all at once. In Experiment 4a, the occurrence of
each digit was self-paced by participants. In Experiment 4b, the digits
appeared sequentially on the computer screen, with a fixed 500-ms
interval between each digit. Other changes were minor and were a
consequence of the necessary shift from group pencil-and-paper experiments to individual computer-controlled experiments. Notably,
participants were now asked to report orally to the experimenter, on
each target occurrence, whether the difference between the two digits
surrounding the target equaled ⫹3 or ⫺3.

Experiment 4a
Method
Participants. A total of 24 undergraduate students from the
Université Paris Descartes participated in the experiment in partial
fulfillment of a course requirement. All participants were native
French speakers. Participants were randomly assigned to one of the
four Target ⫻ Digit Combination experimental groups (n ⫽ 6).
Materials. The problems and the test items were the same as
in Experiment 3. Because the number of participants per group was
now 6, a total of 6 problems and 6 tests were randomly drawn
among the 40 that were generated for each group in Experiment 3.
The experiment was carried out with PsyScope for Mac OS X
(J. D. Cohen, MacWhinney, Flatt, & Provost, 1993) on a PowerBook G4 (Apple Inc., Cupertino, CA) 15.4-in. (39.1-cm) widescreen display. The target digits, the sequences of 20 digits, and the
test strings were printed in Chicago font, size 26. The distance
between the left border of the screen and the first digit of the
sequence of 20 digits, as well as the distance between two successive digits of the sequence, was 1.3 cm.
Procedure. The participants were tested individually in a
sound-attenuated room. The experiment consisted of a study phase
and a test phase. Before the study phase, participants were informed that at the beginning of each problem, a digit displayed at
the top left of the screen indicated the value of the target for the
problem; they were instructed to press the space bar to reveal each
digit of a sequence of digits that would appear progressively from
left to right, in the middle of the screen. The participants were told
that when the digit displayed after a keystroke was revealed to be
a target, they would have to calculate whether the difference
between the two digits surrounding the target equaled ⫹3 or ⫺3.
Participants were asked to provide their answer orally (yes or no;
note that before responding, participants had to press the key once
more to reveal the digit situated on the right of the target). Finally,
as in prior experiments, participants were informed that the target
digit could occur more than once within a sequence. At the end of
each problem, a message invited participants to press the space bar
to proceed to the next problem.
4

We thank Brian Scholl and two anonymous reviewers of a draft of this
article for drawing our attention to this problem.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

90

PACTON AND PERRUCHET

Once the 20 problems of the study phase were completed,
participants performed the recognition test. They were instructed to select which of two strings of three digits was among
the digit sequences viewed in the study phase of the experiment.
As in prior experiments, participants were told that they had to
make a choice for each of the 16 pairs, even if they sometimes
felt that they were guessing. They were to press the Q key of the
(French) AZERTY keyboard if they felt that the correct answer
was the string on the left and the M key if they felt that the
correct answer was the string on the right. The screen was
cleared immediately after the participant’s keystroke, and there
was a 2-s delay before the presentation of the following pair.
The two strings of digits, separated with a slash mark, were
displayed in the center of the screen.

Results
Figure 5 shows the mean percentage of correct responses on the
recognition test for items with adjacent dependencies, for items
with nonadjacent dependencies evaluated with the familiar test
items, and for items with nonadjacent dependencies evaluated with
the transfer test items. An initial ANOVA was performed, with

digit combination (64 and 3X7 vs. 37 and 6X4) and target (sample
0, 2, 9 vs. sample 1, 5, 8) as between-subjects variables and type
of dependency (adjacent vs. nonadjacent) as a within-subject variable. The number of correct responses differed only as a function
of the type of dependency, F(1, 20) ⫽ 31.50, p ⬍ .01, MSE ⫽
1.06, ␩2p ⫽ .61, with better performance on items involving nonadjacent dependencies (M ⫽ 68.23, SE ⫽ 3.53) than on items
involving adjacent dependencies (M ⫽ 47.40, SE ⫽ 3.01). Performance was above chance level for the items involving nonadjacent
dependencies, t(23) ⫽ 5.17, p ⬍ .01, whereas performance did not
differ from chance level for the items involving adjacent dependencies, t(23) ⫽ 0.86, p ⫽ .40.
A second analysis, with digit combination (3X7 vs. 6X4) and
target (sample 0, 2, 9 vs. sample 1, 5, 8) as between-subjects
variables and type of intervening digit (familiar vs. transfer) as a
within-subject variable, examined the effect of transfer on nonadjacent dependencies. As in Experiment 3, performance was better
for familiar items than for transfer items, although the effect of the
type of intervening digit failed to reach significance, F(1, 20) ⫽
3.54, p ⫽ .07, MSE ⫽ 0.71, ␩2p ⫽ .15. Performance was again
above chance level for both familiar items (M ⫽ 73.96, SE ⫽

Figure 5. Mean percentage of correct responses (and standard error of the mean) as a function of the type of
items used to assess the learning of adjacent and nonadjacent dependencies for the four groups of participants
in Experiment 4a. Group 1 (0, 2, 9) was presented with the adjacent pair 64, the nonadjacent pair 3X7, and the
target digit 0, 2, or 9; Group 1 (1, 5, 8) was presented with the adjacent pair 64, the nonadjacent pair 3X7, and
the target digit 1, 5, or 8; Group 2 (0, 2, 9) was presented with the adjacent pair 37, the nonadjacent pair 6X4,
and the target digit 0, 2, or 9; and Group 2 (1, 5, 8) was presented with the adjacent pair 37, the nonadjacent pair
6X4, and the target digit 1, 5, or 8. gr.1 ⫽ Group 1; gr.2 ⫽ Group 2.

LEARNING NONADJACENT DEPENDENCY

2.06), t(23) ⫽ 5.82, p ⬍ .01, and transfer items (M ⫽ 62.50, SE ⫽
2.50), t(23) ⫽ 2.50, p ⫽ .02.

Experiment 4b

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Method
Participants. A total of 24 undergraduate students from the
Université Paris Descartes participated in the experiment in partial
fulfillment of a course requirement. All participants were native
French speakers. Participants were randomly assigned to one of the
four Target ⫻ Digit Combination experimental groups (n ⫽ 6).
Materials. The materials were the same as in Experiment 4a.
Procedure. The procedure was the same as in Experiment 4a,
with one exception concerning the manner in which the sequences
of digits were displayed on the computer screen during the study
phase. Instead of being self-paced, the timing of the digit presentation was predetermined by the program. The target digit remained on the screen for 2,000 ms before the occurrence of the
first digit of the 20-digit sequence, and a 500-ms interval separated
the display of two successive digits of the sequence.

Results
Figure 6 shows the mean percentage of correct responses on the
recognition test for items with adjacent dependencies, for items

91

with nonadjacent dependencies evaluated with the familiar test
items, and for items with nonadjacent dependencies evaluated with
the transfer test items. An initial ANOVA was performed, with
digit combination (64 and 3X7 vs. 37 and 6X4) and target (sample
0, 2, 9 vs. sample 1, 5, 8) as between-subjects variables and type
of dependency (adjacent vs. nonadjacent) as a within-subject variable. The number of correct responses differed only as a function
of the type of dependency, F(1, 20) ⫽ 20.79, p ⬍ .01, MSE ⫽
2.31, ␩2p ⫽ .51, with better performance on items with nonadjacent
dependencies (M ⫽ 74.48, SE ⫽ 2.86) than on items with adjacent
dependencies (M ⫽ 49.48, SE ⫽ 4.02). Performance was above
chance level for the items with nonadjacent dependencies, t(23) ⫽
8.55, p ⬍ .01, whereas performance did not differ from chance
level for the items with adjacent dependencies, t(23) ⫽ 0.13,
p ⫽ .90.
A second analysis included digit combination (3X7 vs. 6X4) and
target (sample 0, 2, 9 vs. sample 1, 5, 8) as between-subjects
variables and type of intervening digit (familiar vs. transfer) as a
within-subject variable. As in Experiment 4a, the effect of the type
of intervening digit failed to reach significance, F(1, 20) ⫽ 3.71,
p ⫽ .07, MSE ⫽ 0.68, ␩2p ⫽ .16, but in contrast to prior experiments, performance was descriptively better for transfer items than
for familiar items. Notably, performance was above chance level
for both familiar items (M ⫽ 71.88, SE ⫽ 4.59), t(23) ⫽ 4.76, p ⬍

Figure 6. Mean percentage of correct responses (and standard error of the mean) as a function of the type of
items used to assess the learning of adjacent and nonadjacent dependencies for the four groups of participants
in Experiment 4b. Group 1 (0, 2, 9) was presented with the adjacent pair 64, the nonadjacent pair 3X7, and the
target digit 0, 2, or 9; Group 1 (1, 5, 8) was presented with the adjacent pair 64, the nonadjacent pair 3X7, and
the target digit 1, 5, or 8; Group 2 (0, 2, 9) was presented with the adjacent pair 37, the nonadjacent pair 6X4,
and the target digit 0, 2, or 9; and Group 2 (1, 5, 8) was presented with the adjacent pair 37, the nonadjacent pair
6X4, and the target digit 1, 5, or 8. gr.1 ⫽ Group 1; gr.2 ⫽ Group 2.

PACTON AND PERRUCHET

92

.01, and transfer items (M ⫽ 77.08, SE ⫽ 3.96), t(23) ⫽ 6.84, p ⬍
.01, as in prior experiments.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Discussion
Experiments 4a and 4b confirm the conclusion of the first three
experiments regarding the possibility of learning nonadjacent dependencies when the task demand requires joint attention to the
relevant elements. As in Experiment 3, the recognition scores for
the test items embedding the nonadjacent dependency were significantly above chance, even when the intermediary digits were
not seen in the training phase. However, the difference in performance according to whether the intermediary digits of the test
items were seen or not seen during training was somewhat inconsistent across experiments. Although this difference never reached
significance, Experiment 4a tended to replicate the transfer decrement observed in Experiment 3, whereas the trend was reversed in
Experiment 4b. Given that the only difference between Experiments 4a and 4b concerned the fact that the successive appearance
of the digits was self-paced and computer-paced, respectively, this
discrepancy is hardly interpretable. It is likely that the apparent
reversal of the transfer decrement in Experiment 4b—namely,
descriptively better performance in the transfer than in the familiar
situation—should be attributed to noise in the data. Note that other
studies in the implicit learning domain have also reported discordant results regarding the transfer decrement effect.
Considering the learning of an invariant as an example, we note
that the use of transfer in place of familiar test stimuli in prior
research usually has yielded no significant effect (e.g., McGeorge
& Burton, 1990). However, both poorer (Stadler, Warren, &
Lesch, 2000) and better (Newell & Bright, 2002, p. 1110) performance in transfer, as compared with familiar, situations occasionally has been reported.
The procedural changes introduced in Experiments 4a and 4b
were devised to increase the amount of attentional processing
devoted to the individual nontarget digits, which included those
forming the adjacent dependency. These changes were intended to
test our hypothesis that even adjacent relations are not learned
when the task does not require the joint processing of the relevant
elements, even though the duration of exposure to individual
elements is controlled. The results were clear-cut: There was no
evidence of learning in either experiment, even at a descriptive
level. It is worth stressing, however, that we controlled the objective duration of the visual displays and not the amount of time
actually allocated by the participants to the active processing of
those displays. It remains possible that processing duration varies
despite the equalized duration of objective exposure. A posteriori
control over the actual processing engaged by the participants
should be carried out in future studies, perhaps with eye-tracking
measures. If eye-tracking measures reveal a sizable disproportion
in the duration of processing allocated to the different items, then
ruling out the hypothesis that the amount of processing time is a
causal factor would certainly require a more radical change in the
experimental procedure.

General Discussion
A Summary of Results
Participants who were asked to process adjacent elements
learned adjacent dependencies but did not learn nonadjacent de-

pendencies. As shown in Table 1, this pattern of results does not
discriminate among the predictions of different theories. Indeed,
this was expected irrespective of whether contiguity or attention is
construed as the causal factor. The performance of the participants
who processed nonadjacent digits to fulfill the task requirements
was much more informative. Two main results emerged.
First, there was no evidence for adjacent dependency learning in
the participants processing nonadjacent digits. This learning failure
occurred despite the fact that (a) in each of the five reported
experiments, adjacent dependencies were presented 40 times over
the course of the entire study phase and (b) the target searching
task ensured the individual processing of each digit of the sequences. Although processing may have been somewhat limited in
the first three experiments, in which the digit strings were displayed as a whole, the digit-by-digit presentation of the problems
used for Experiments 4a and 4b prompted a more extensive processing of each item.
Second, participants processing nonadjacent dependencies for
meeting the task demand learned them in five independent experiments. It is noteworthy that the participants’ recognition score was
not significantly lower than the recognition score for adjacent
dependencies reached by the participants who focused on adjacent
dependencies in Experiment 1. This remained true when nonadjacent dependencies were displayed twice less frequently than adjacent dependencies in Experiment 2. Experiments 3, 4a, and 4b,
showed that performance was also above chance level in a transfer
test, in which the intervening events were changed between the
study phase and the test phase. Performance was lower when the
intervening events were changed between the study phase and the
test phase than when the same intervening events were used in
both phases in Experiment 3, although Experiments 4a and 4b
showed no significant difference (and contradictory trends) according to whether the intervening items in the test were old or
new.
As shown in Table 1, this pattern of results is only consistent
with the attention-based theory of associative learning outlined in
the introduction, which posits that selective attention is a necessary
and sufficient condition for learning to occur. In this discussion,
we first elaborate further on this theory and how it may be
articulated with the extant literature on learning. Next, we focus on
the sense in which our study and the theoretical conclusions it
supports concern implicit, rather than explicit, forms of learning.
Finally, we outline some of the problems that arise when attempting to apply the theory to specific domains, such as language,
music, and visual perception.

An Attentional Account of Adjacent and Nonadjacent
Dependency Learning
The failure to observe learning of adjacent dependencies when
the instructions drew participants’ attention toward nonadjacent
dependencies provides new support for the models of learning
positing that attention is a necessary condition for learning to
occur. The earlier accounts of conditioning (e.g., Guthrie, 1930)
focused exclusively on the contiguity of the conditioned and
unconditioned stimuli (CS and US, respectively). However, further
studies made it obvious that the repeated exposure to a pair of
contiguous events is not sufficient to trigger associative learning.
The well-documented effect of blocking (Kamin, 1968) illustrates

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

LEARNING NONADJACENT DEPENDENCY

this point. In the first phase of a blocking experiment, a CS,
namely A, is followed by a US. In the second phase, A is always
followed by the same US, but it is systematically presented with
another cue, B. The phenomenon of blocking designates the fact
that the relation between B and the US is not learned in those
conditions, or at least is not learned to the same extent as if B had
been associated with the US in standard conditions. In other words,
the contiguity of B and the outcome is not sufficient for learning
to occur. The phenomenon is important in and of itself but also
because it provides a simple explanation for other, apparently more
complex, phenomena. For instance, Rescorla (1968) showed that
adding an unpaired US during training decreased conditioning,
although the level of contiguity (i.e., the number of CS–US pairings) was kept constant. This result was initially conceived of as a
demonstration that animals are able to assess the genuine contingency between events. However, a few years later, Rescorla and
Wagner (1972) suggested that the phenomenon of blocking
could account for the results of Rescorla (1968), because the
unpaired occurrences of the US elicit conditioning to some background stimuli, which in turn, blocks the conditioning to the
experimental CS.
Of special interest for our concern, the phenomenon of blocking
has been accounted for by a framework based on attention (Mackintosh, 1975). The relation between B and the outcome is not
processed attentionally, it was argued, because the predictive value
of A captures all of the learner’s available attention. Associative
blocking, and a few other related phenomena, such as the CS
preexposure effect (Lubow, 1989) and, more recently, highlighting
(Kruschke, 2001), have led contemporary researchers to emphasize the crucial role of attention in associative learning and to
elaborate various attention-based models (see Kruschke, 2003,
2005).
The need for learners’ attentional involvement has been confirmed by a number of studies in other experimental arrangements
as well. In recent research on implicit learning, for instance (see
Perruchet, in press; Perruchet & Pacton, 2006; Shanks, 2005, for
reviews), the principle of these studies consists of adding a concurrent secondary task during the training session, then observing
whether performance improvement is equivalent to that observed
in a single-task, standard procedure. With regard to artificial
grammars, Dienes, Broadbent, and Berry (1991) demonstrated that
the accuracy of grammaticality judgments was lowered when
participants had to perform a concurrent random number generation task during the familiarization phase. The studies carried out
on dynamic system control tasks provide a more contrasting picture. The theory surrounding the early studies on these tasks
posited a distinction between two forms of learning: selective (i.e.,
with attention) and unselective (i.e., without attention; e.g., Berry
& Broadbent, 1988), and some initial studies seemingly supported
this view. However, subsequent studies (e.g., Green & Shanks,
1993) failed to replicate earlier results despite extensive attempts
to do so and found that, as a rule, the secondary task impaired
performance irrespective of the complexity of the task. A similar
story happened with serial reaction time tasks, with a few initial
studies (e.g., A. Cohen, Ivry, & Keele, 1990) claiming that nonattentional learning is efficient for the simplest forms of sequential
dependencies. The secondary task typically used in this context is
a tone-counting task, in which a high- or low-pitched tone sound
is emitted after each trial, and participants are required to keep a

93

running count of one of them (e.g., high-pitched tones). Performance in these conditions typically remains above chance. However, observing performance improvement under dual-task conditions does not imply the existence of a nonattentional form of
learning, because the secondary task may not deplete the attentional resources completely. As claimed by Stadler (1995), “even
when implicit serial learning is observed in conjunction with the
tone-counting task, . . . it cannot be said that learning occurred
without attentional capacity—the participants certainly devoted
attention to the serial RT task” (p. 683). Closing their survey of the
role of attention in implicit sequence learning, Hsiao and Reber
(1998) concluded, “We view sequence learning as occurring in the
background of the residual attention after the cost of the tonecounting task and the key-pressing task. If there is still sufficient
attention available to the encoding of the sequence, learning will
be successful; otherwise, failure will result” (p. 487; for other
approaches that emphasize the role of attention, see Frensch et al.,
1994; Jimenez & Mendez, 1999).
The role played by selective attention in acquisition processes
also has been identified in, for instance, the literature on automatisms (e.g., Fisk & Schneider, 1984), covariation learning (Hoffman & Sebald, 2005), word segmentation (Toro, Sinnett, & SotoFaraco, 2005), visual perception (e.g., Baker, Olson, & Behrmann,
2004; Turk-Browne et al., 2005), contextual cueing (Jiang &
Chun, 2001; Jiang & Leung, 2005), and memory (e.g., Roediger,
1990). This contention holds even for the so-called implicit memory phenomena, in which performance does not involve the recollection of the initial episodes. There is now overwhelming evidence that attention to the material at the time of encoding is a
necessary condition for the observation of improved performance
in subsequent implicit memory tests, such as word completion and
perceptual identification tasks (e.g., Crabb & Dark, 1999), reading
tasks (MacDonald & MacLeod, 1998), and object decision tasks
(Ganor-Stern, Seamon, & Carrasco, 1998).
As noted in the introduction, however, acknowledging the necessity of attention in learning does not provide, as such, an
account for nonadjacent dependency learning. In all of the studies
evoked above, the conditions of contiguity are met, and hence their
results are compatible with the claim that associative learning
requires both the contiguity of events and the learner’s attention.
To account for nonadjacent dependency learning, learners’ attentional involvement needs to be construed as a sufficient condition.
This proposal is consonant with the position taken by several
authors, who have construed associative learning as an automatic
process that associates all the components that are simultaneously
present in the attentional focus (Frensch & Miner, 1994; Logan &
Etherton, 1994; Perruchet & Vinter, 2002; Stadler, 1995; Treisman
& Gelade, 1980). Our result that participants learned nonadjacent
dependencies when asked to process them provides a striking
confirmation of this view. The objective adjacency of the events in
the display would play no role in itself when attentional factors are
controlled. Indeed, when contiguity and attentional processing
were pitted against each other, there was no residual role for
contiguity. The relation between two nonadjacent events can be
learned whenever there is some reason for processing the two
events jointly.
Prior studies also showed the possibility of learning nonadjacent
dependencies, but only when the to-be-learned material possessed
specific properties, such as a high variability of the X events (e.g.,

94

PACTON AND PERRUCHET

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Gómez, 2002), a high level of similarity between A and C events
(e.g., Onnis et al., 2005), or the presence of pauses between the
AXC sequences (Peña et al., 2002). On the basis of those results,
one could argue that this form of learning requires quite specific
conditions, which are qualitatively different from the conditions
required to learn adjacent relations. We suggest, instead, as noted
in the introduction, that such variables could be effective because
they facilitate the attentional processing of the relevant events. Our
demonstration that participants’ performance may change drastically as a function of task instructions, while the objective properties of the material are kept constant, provides especially strong
evidence for this interpretation of the earlier literature.

Attention and Implicitness
The fact that our procedure involved a manipulation of participants’ attentional allocation through the instructions they received
could suggest that we actually contrasted incidental and intentional
learning. In this account, learning either adjacent or nonadjacent
dependencies would be possible only when participants intentionally search for those regularities. It is worth stressing that this is
not our intended conclusion. Although we have no concerns with
the claim that such learning can result from an analytic, explicit
search, we were interested in the possibility of learning in incidental conditions, in keeping with the current focus of most learning researchers. Was our procedure actually well-suited to meeting
this objective?
Our task was nominally incidental because, although the task
involved the joint attentional processing of two digits, the instructions required neither a search for the repeated occurrences of
some pairs of digits nor the explicit memorization of those digits.
Beyond the instructions, however, it is important to examine
whether participants could have shifted themselves to a strategy of
memorization. A reasonable assumption is that participants could
have done so if they had some reason to believe that learning the
digits would help them to perform the task demands, which primarily consisted of detecting the target among an array of distractors. In fact, this is not the case because the repeated patterns
provided a quite unreliable cue for the presence of a target. One of
the two repeated patterns was never associated with the target (e.g.,
the adjacent dependencies for participants dealing with nonadjacent digits). Moreover, even if one restricts the analysis to the
repeated pattern with which participants dealt while performing
the task, half of the occurrences of this pattern happened without
the target and half of the targets occurred outside this pattern. As
a consequence, a strategy consisting of searching for this pattern in
order to guide target detection would lead to missing half of the
targets and to having attention drawn toward an irrelevant part of
the strings in half of the cases. All of these characteristics make it
quite unlikely that participants were engaged in an explicit search
of the statistical regularities of the digit sequences.
The discussion above makes it clear that learning was certainly
implicit in the sense that it was incidental. It is worth adding that
we do not claim that the resulting knowledge of the dependencies
was implicit in the sense that it was unavailable to consciousness.
Although the possibility that some form of knowledge may affect
performance without being available to consciousness cannot be
ruled out, several authors have emphasized the lack of empirical
support for such a claim (for reviews, see, e.g., Dulany, 1997;

Shanks & St. John, 1994). Irrespective of this possibility, restricting a priori the manifestation of implicit learning to some uninformed guessing, similar in some ways to the vague feeling elicited
in subliminal perception, appears to be unproductively restrictive
and to leave behind the most important expressions of implicit
learning in real-world settings. We subscribe here to the view that
implicit learning processes primarily shape conscious percepts and
representations (e.g., Perruchet & Vinter, 2002; Perruchet, Vinter,
& Gallego, 1997). In keeping with this position, we measured
learning through a forced-choice recognition test, which is traditionally construed as an explicit test. Note that this measure can
hardly be conceived of as a departure from the current practice in
implicit learning research. For instance, all of the studies on word
segmentation following the seminal articles of Saffran and collaborators (Saffran et al., 1996; e.g., Newport & Aslin, 2004; Onnis et
al., 2005) have also used a forced-choice recognition test to assess
learning. To our best knowledge, this procedure has never been
construed as preventing the consensual embodiment of this literature within the context of implicit learning research (for a review,
see Perruchet & Pacton, 2006).

Questions for Further Research
A theory of associative learning positing that joint attention on the
relevant events is both a necessary and a sufficient condition for
learning associations provides a forceful argument for extending the
relevance of associative learning principles to complex domains, such
as natural language, music, and object perception. Indeed, the theory
allows us to account for the learning of remote dependencies, which
occur routinely in those domains, while avoiding the apparently
intractable problem of combinatorial explosion, given that the number
of possible associations to be scrutinized grows exponentially with the
number of authorized intervening events. The problem, in principle, is
avoided here because potential associations are preselected by attentional mechanisms.
However, a gap remains to be bridged between theory and the
potential domains of application. The main problem concerns the
question of the features that are able to capture attention in each
domain. Certainly, attention may be guided by explicit instructions, as in the experiments described above. However, this cannot
be considered a general solution. At best, explicit instructions can
play a role in supervised learning, but they cannot account for the
much more frequent situations in which people learn from their
own experience, without instructional guidance. Of course, a number of environmental features are known to be naturally prone to
capturing attention. This is the case of certain acoustic properties
of language or music, or visual features such as movement. However, for the explanation to be viable, those features should have a
high chance of guiding attention toward the relevant events. The
deep issue is, then, Why should those features be a priori relevant?
Why, for instance, should the acoustic and prosodic cues that are
most predisposed to capturing attention in language utterances
provide a guide toward the relevant aspects of the language, given
that those aspects are presumably syntactic or semantic in nature?
Although this issue stands out of the scope of this article, we submit
that two general, and nonexclusive, responses may be put forth. The
first solution consists of invoking innateness: Evolution would have
made us sensitive to some specific features of our environment
because of their relevance for adaptive purposes. Another solution,

LEARNING NONADJACENT DEPENDENCY

which applies only to those aspects that are a product of human
culture, with language as the main target, relies on the concept of
reversed evolution. Instead of positing that the human species has
evolved to deal with complex linguistic structures, it is possible to
conceive that language has evolved to be learned by humans, given
the general abilities they have developed in response to adaptive
constraints preceding language appearance (Newport, 1990). Further
research is needed to deepen these issues.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Conclusion
The detection of remote dependencies represents an apparent
challenge for a framework based on associative or statistical mechanisms. Indeed, most of the literature on associative learning has
focused on adjacent dependencies, whereas there is evidence that
higher cognitive activities, such as language, music, and object
perception, also exploit the existence of nonadjacent dependencies
in their material. We have provided experimental support for an
associative learning model positing attention as a necessary and
sufficient condition, which accounts for both adjacent and nonadjacent dependency learning in the very same terms.

References
Ahissar, M., & Hochstein, S. (1996). Learning pop-out detection: Specificities to stimulus characteristics. Vision Research, 36, 3487–3500.
Baker, C. I., Olson, C. R., & Behrmann, M. (2004). Role of attention and
perceptual grouping in visual statistical learning. Psychological Science,
15, 460 – 466.
Berry, D. C., & Broadbent, D. E. (1988). Interactive tasks and the implicit–
explicit distinction. British Journal of Psychology, 79, 251–272.
Bonatti, L. L., Peña, M., Nespor, M., & Mehler, J. (2005). Linguistic
constraints on statistical computations: The role of consonants and
vowels in continuous speech processing. Psychological Science, 16,
451– 459.
Cohen, A., Ivry, R., & Keele, S. W. (1990). Attention and structure in
sequence learning. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory and Cognition, 16, 17–30.
Cohen, J. D., MacWhinney, B., Flatt, M., & Provost, J. (1993). PsyScope:
A new graphic interactive environment for designing psychology experiments. Behavioral Research Methods, Instruments, and Computers, 25,
257–271.
Cowan, N. (1991). Recurrent speech patterns as cues to the segmentation
of multisyllabic sequences. Acta Psychologica, 77, 121–135.
Crabb, B. T., & Dark, V. (1999). Perceptual implicit memory requires
attentional encoding. Memory & Cognition, 27, 267–275.
Creel, S. C., Newport, E. L., & Aslin, R. N. (2004). Distant melodies:
Statistical learning of non-adjacent dependencies in tone sequences.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 30, 1119 –1130.
Dienes, Z., Broadbent, D. E., & Berry, D. (1991). Implicit and explicit
knowledge bases in artificial grammar learning. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 17, 875– 887.
Driver, J., & Baylis, G. (1998). Attention and visual object segmentation.
In R. Parasuraman (Ed.), The attentive brain (pp. 299 –325). Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Dulany, D. E. (1997). Consciousness in the explicit (deliberative) and
implicit (evocative). In J. Cohen & J. Schooler (Eds.), Scientific approaches to consciousness (pp. 179 –211). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Fisk, A. D., & Schneider, W. (1984). Memory as a function of attention,
level of processing, and automatization. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 10, 181–197.
Frensch, P. A., Buchner, A., & Lin, J. (1994). Implicit learning of unique

95

and ambiguous serial transitions in the presence and absence of a
distractor task. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory,
and Cognition, 20, 567–584.
Frensch, P. A., & Miner, S. C. (1994). Effects of presentation rate and of
individual differences in short-term memory capacity on an indirect
measure of serial learning. Memory and Cognition, 22, 95–110.
Ganor-Stern, D., Seamon, J. G., & Carrasco, M. (1998). The role of
attention and study time in explicit and implicit memory for unfamiliar
visual stimuli. Memory & Cognition, 26, 1187–1195.
Gómez, R. L. (2002). Variability and detection of invariant structure.
Psychological Science, 13, 431– 436.
Gómez, R. L. (2006). Dynamically guided learning. In Y. Munakata &
M. H. Johnson (Eds.), Attention & Performance XXI: Processes of
change in brain and cognitive development (pp. 87–110). Oxford, England: Oxford University Press.
Green, R. E. A., & Shanks, D. R. (1993). On the existence of independent
learning systems: An examination of some evidence. Memory & Cognition, 21, 304 –317.
Guthrie, E. R. (1930). Conditioning as a principle of learning. Psychological Review, 37, 412– 428.
Hoffmann, J., & Sebald, A. (2005). When obvious covariations are not
even learned implicitly. European Journal of Cognitive Psychology, 17,
449 – 480.
Hsiao, A. T., & Reber, A. (1998). The role of attention in implicit sequence
learning: Exploring the limits of the cognitive unconscious. In M.
Stadler & P. Frensch (Eds.), Handbook of implicit learning (pp. 471–
494). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Jiang, Y., & Chun, M. M. (2001). Selective attention modulates implicit
learning. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 54A, 1105–
1124.
Jiang, Y., & Leung, A.-W. (2005). Implicit learning of ignored visual
context. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 12, 100 –106.
Jimenez, L., & Mendez, C. (1999). Which attention is needed for implicit
sequence learning? Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 25, 236 –259.
Joseph, J. S., Chun, M. M., & Nakayama, K. (1997). Attentional requirements in a ‘preattentive’ feature search task. Nature, 387, 805– 807.
Jungé, J. A., Turk-Browne, N. B., & Scholl, B. J. (2005). Visual statistical
learning through intervening noise. Journal of Vision, 5, 421a.
Kamin, L. J. (1968). ‘Attention-like’ processes in classical conditioning. In
M. R. Jones (Ed.), Miami symposium on the prediction of behavior:
Aversive stimulation (pp. 9 –33). Coral Gables, FL: University of Miami
Press.
Kruschke, J. K. (2001). The inverse base rate effect is not explained by
eliminative interference. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 27, 1385–1400.
Kruschke, J. K. (2003). Attention in learning. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 12, 171–175.
Kruschke, J. K. (2005). Learning involves attention. In G. Houghton (Ed.),
Connectionist models in cognitive psychology (pp. 113–140). Hove,
United Kingdom: Psychology Press.
Kuhn, G., & Dienes, Z. (2005). Implicit learning of nonlocal musical rules:
Implicitly learning more than chunks. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 31, 1417–1432,
Logan, G. D., & Etherton, J. L. (1994). What is learned during automatization? The role of attention in constructing an instance. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory and Cognition, 20, 1022–
1050.
Lubow, R. E. (1989). Latent inhibition and conditioned attention theory.
Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
MacDonald, P. A., & MacLeod, C. M. (1998). The influence of attention
at encoding on direct and indirect remembering. Acta Psychologica, 98,
291–310.
Mackintosh, N. J. (1975). A theory of attention: Variations in the associa-

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

96

PACTON AND PERRUCHET

bility of stimuli with reinforcement. Psychological Review, 82, 276 –
298.
McGeorge, P., & Burton, A. M. (1990). Semantic processing in an incidental learning task. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology,
42A, 597– 609.
Newell, B. R., & Bright, J. E. H. (2002). Evidence against hyperspecificity
in implicit invariant learning. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 55A, 1109 –1126.
Newport, E. L. (1990). Maturational constraints on language learning.
Cognitive Science, 14, 11–28.
Newport, E. L., & Aslin, R. N. (2004). Learning at a distance: I. Statistical
learning of non-adjacent dependencies. Cognitive Psychology, 48, 127–
162.
Onnis, L., Christiansen, M. H., Chater, N., & Gómez, R. (2003, August).
Reduction of uncertainty in human sequential learning: Preliminary
evidence from artificial grammar learning. Paper presented at the 25th
annual meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, Boston.
Onnis, L., Monaghan, P., Richmond, K., & Chater, N. (2005). Phonology
impacts segmentation in speech processing. Journal of Memory and
Language, 53, 225–237.
Peña, M., Bonatti, L. L., Nespor, M., & Mehler, J. (2002). Signal-driven
computations in speech processing. Science, 298, 604 – 607.
Perruchet, P. (2005). Statistical approaches to language acquisition and the
self-organizing consciousness: A reversal of perspective. Psychological
Research, 69, 316 –329.
Perruchet, P. (in press). Implicit learning. In J. Byrne (Series Ed.) & H. L.
Roediger III (Vol. Ed.), Learning and memory: A comprehensive reference: Vol. 2. Cognitive psychology of memory. Oxford, England:
Elsevier.
Perruchet, P., & Pacton, S. (2006). Implicit learning and statistical learning: One phenomenon, two approaches. Trends in Cognitive Sciences,
10, 233–238.
Perruchet, P., & Peereman, R. (2004). The exploitation of distributional
information in syllable processing. Journal of Neurolinguistics, 17,
97–119.
Perruchet, P., & Rey, A. (2005). Does the mastery of center-embedded
linguistic structures distinguish humans from nonhuman primates? Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 7, 307–313.
Perruchet, P., Tyler, M. D., Galland, N., & Peereman, R. (2004). Learning
nonadjacent dependencies: No need for algebraic-like computations.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 133, 573–583.
Perruchet, P., & Vinter, A. (2002). The self-organized consciousness.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 25, 297–388.
Perruchet, P., Vinter, A., & Gallego, J. (1997). Implicit learning shapes
new conscious percepts and representations. Psychonomic Bulletin and
Review, 4, 43– 48.
Perruchet, P., Vinter, A., Pacteau, C., & Gallego, J. (2002). The formation
of structurally relevant units in artificial grammar learning. Quarterly
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 55A, 485–503.
Redington, M., & Chater, N. (1998). Connectionist and statistical approaches to language acquisition: A distributional perspective. Language and Cognitive Processes, 13, 129 –191.
Redington, M., Chater, N., & Finch, S. (1998). Distributional information:

A powerful cue for acquiring syntactic categories. Cognitive Science, 22,
425– 469.
Rescorla, R. A. (1968). Probability of shock in the presence and absence of
CS in fear conditioning. Journal of Comparative and Physiological
Psychology, 66, 1–5.
Rescorla, R. A., & Wagner, A. R. (1972). A theory of Pavlovian conditioning: Variations in the effectiveness of reinforcement and nonreinforcement. In A. H. Black & W. F. Prokasy (Eds.), Classical conditioning II: Current theory and research (pp. 64 – 69). New York: AppletonCentury-Crofts.
Roediger, H. L., III (1990). Implicit memory: A commentary. Bulletin of
the Psychonomic Society, 28, 373–380.
Saffran, J. R., Newport, E. L., & Aslin, R. N. (1996). Word segmentation:
The role of distributional cues. Journal of Memory and Language, 35,
606 – 621.
Scholl, B. J. (2001). Objects and attention: The state of the art. Cognition,
80, 1– 46.
Seidenberg, M. S., & MacDonald, M. C. (1999). A probabilistic constraints
approach to language acquisition and processing. Cognitive Science, 23,
569 –588.
Servan-Schreiber, D., & Anderson, J. R. (1990). Learning artificial grammars with competitive chunking. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 16, 592– 608.
Shanks, D. R. (2005). Implicit learning. In K. Lamberts & R. Goldstone
(Eds.), Handbook of cognition (pp. 202–220). London: Sage.
Shanks, D. R., & St. John, M. F. (1994). Characteristics of dissociable
human learning systems. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 17, 367– 447.
Stadler, M. A. (1995). Role of attention in implicit learning. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 21, 674 –
685.
Stadler, M. A., & Frensch, P. A. (1998). Handbook of implicit learning.
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Stadler, M. A., Warren, J. L., & Lesch, S. L. (2000). Is there cross-format
transfer in implicit invariance learning? Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 52A, 235–245.
Stanback, M. L. (1992). Syllable and rime patterns for teaching reading:
Analysis of a frequency-based vocabulary of 17,602 words. Annals of
Dyslexia, 42, 196 –221.
Toro, J. M., Sinnett, S., & Soto-Faraco, S. (2005). Speech segmentation by
statistical learning depends on attention. Cognition, 97, B25–B34.
Treisman, A. M., & Gelade, G. (1980). A feature integration theory of
attention. Cognitive Psychology, 12, 97–136.
Turk-Browne, N. B., Jungé, J. A., & Scholl, B. J. (2005). The automaticity
of visual statistical learning. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 134, 552–564.
Whittlesea, B. W. A., & Dorken, M. D. (1993). Incidentally, things in
general are incidentally determined: An episodic-processing account of
implicit learning. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 122,
227–248.

Received April 28, 2006
Revision received August 6, 2007
Accepted August 18, 2007 䡲

