Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition
2008, Vol. 34, No. 2, 369 –380

Copyright 2008 by the American Psychological Association
0278-7393/08/$12.00 DOI: 10.1037/0278-7393.34.2.369

Orienting Attention in Visual Working Memory Reduces Interference From
Memory Probes
Tal Makovski

Rachel Sussman

Harvard University and University of Minnesota

Harvard University

Yuhong V. Jiang
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Harvard University and University of Minnesota
Given a changing visual environment, and the limited capacity of visual working memory (VWM), the
contents of VWM must be in constant flux. Using a change detection task, the authors show that VWM
is subject to obligatory updating in the face of new information. Change detection performance is
enhanced when the item that may change is retrospectively cued 1 s after memory encoding and 0.5 s
before testing. The retro-cue benefit cannot be explained by memory decay or by a reduction in
interference from other items held in VWM. Rather, orienting attention to a single memory item makes
VWM more resistant to interference from the test probe. The authors conclude that the content of VWM
is volatile unless it receives focused attention, and that the standard change detection task underestimates
VWM capacity.
Keywords: visual working memory, visual attention, memory decay, memory interference, change
detection

original Sperling study, or it may arise from interference, as is the
case in a later study in which a visual probe at the location of the
original memory item induced backward masking (Averbach &
Coriell, 1961).
Although Sperling’s (1960) study is now a classic in textbook
materials, recent research on visual working memory (VWM) has
reverted back to the use of whole-report procedures to probe
memory capacity. VWM buffers visual information for a few
seconds after its disappearance. It is used frequently in everyday
visual tasks, such as crossing a busy street, speaking to a large
audience, or playing in team sports. It is considered to be more
robust than iconic memory. To measure the capacity of VWM,
most studies use the standard change detection task (Rensink,
2002), in which an array of visual objects is first presented for
memory encoding. After a retention interval of 1 s or so, a probe
array of objects is shown, which may be either the same as the
memory array or different in one object. Accuracy to report the
presence or absence of a change at different memory loads is used
to estimate VWM capacity (Pashler, 1988; Phillips, 1974). There
are reasons why the whole-report procedure has been standard
practice in VWM studies. First, revising the procedure into a
partial-report procedure has not revealed a consistent advantage.
For example, if a single test probe is shown, accuracy can sometimes be worse than when the whole-array probe is shown, perhaps
because the single probe eliminates retrieval context (Jiang, Olson,
& Chun, 2000). Second, adding a partial-report cue to the entire
probe array, such as flagging out one of the test objects as the
relevant comparison object, often leads to no improvement in
comparison with the whole-array condition (Luck & Vogel, 1997).
The partial-report procedure can sometimes be advantageous, particularly when the array is complex and the comparison process
across the entire array is laborious (Hollingworth, 2003). Under

In a classic study, Sperling (1960) flashed an array of letters in
three rows and four columns and asked his participants to recall the
letters. He found that participants could report about four to five
letters, even though they had a subjective impression that more
letters were available immediately after display offset. Sperling
then used a partial-report procedure in which participants were
cued by an auditory beep to report a randomly selected row,
signified by the pitch of the beep. If the beep was played right
when the letters disappeared, participants usually could report
nearly all the letters from the cued row, suggesting that they indeed
had immediate access to a large number of letters. If the beep was
played after a delay of 500 ms or so, reports for a given row
reduced greatly, resulting in an estimate of about 1.5 letters per
row. This study was instrumental to cognitive research. First, it
revealed the presence of a high-capacity iconic memory (Neisser,
1967) that dissipates within half a second or so. After the memory
dissipates, information is stored in visual or verbal short-term
memory, which is relatively stable over time. Second, it showed
that the testing procedure can significantly influence the estimation
of memory capacity. Partial report is superior to whole report if
memory degrades during the testing process. The degradation may
arise from simple decay of information, as is the case in the

Tal Makovski and Yuhong V. Jiang, Harvard University and University
of Minnesota; Rachel Sussman, Harvard University.
This study was supported in part by National Science Foundation Grant
0733764, National Institutes of Health Grant MH071788, and Army Research Office Grant 46926-LS. We thank Khena Swallow, Ken Nakayama,
and Stephan Lewandowsky for comments and suggestions.
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Tal
Makovski, University of Minnesota, N218 Elliott Hall, 75 East River Road,
Minneapolis, MN 55455. E-mail: tal.makovski@gmail.com
369

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

370

MAKOVSKI, SUSSMAN, AND JIANG

Figure 1. A schematic illustration of the whole-report procedure and several partial-report procedures used to
test visual working memory. The retention interval of 1,600 ms is arbitrarily selected.

most VWM testing conditions in which individual items are presented, there is little evidence, from either recent VWM studies or
the old Sperling (1960) and Averbach and Coriell (1961) studies,
that VWM is subjected to the same kind of degradation observed
in iconic memory (Phillips, 1974).
By now, most studies would characterize working memory,
including VWM, as a robust form of memory whose content is
accessible, even though the original input has disappeared and new
input is delivered to the visual system (Miller, Erickson, & Desimone, 1996). This characterization has contributed to the proposed
function of VWM as a bridge across temporal discontinuities and
as a mechanism for mentally manipulating visual information after
its disappearance (Courtney, Petit, Haxby, & Ungerleider, 1998).
In light of these findings, it is perplexing that some recent studies
have revealed a partial-report advantage (Griffin & Nobre, 2003;
Landman, Spekreijse, & Lamme, 2003; Lepsien, Griffin, Devlin,
& Nobre, 2005; Lepsien & Nobre, 2007; Makovski & Jiang,
2007). For example, Landman et al. (2003) presented a partialreport cue—a centrally presented arrow that pointed at the location
of one of the eight memory items—and asked participants to judge
whether the cued item matched a test probe that followed the
partial-report cue. Unlike the cues used in earlier studies (Averbach & Coriell, 1961; Sperling, 1960), the partial-report cue was
delivered long after the memory array had disappeared,1 so it could
not have salvaged the cued item from iconic memory or from the
transition between iconic memory and VWM (Vogel, Woodman,
& Luck, 2006). This procedure was otherwise similar to the other
partial-report procedures used in previous VWM studies, in which
only a single memorized item needed to be compared with the test

probe. However, with this procedure, Landman et al. found a
significant benefit of the partial-report cue that was not observed in
other VWM partial-report procedures. Similarly, Griffin and Nobre (2003) found that if observers were allowed to orient attention
to a single item in VWM prior to the onset of the probe array, they
performed better than if the orienting cue was absent. Figure 1
schematically illustrates the whole-report procedure and several
partial-report procedures used in VWM studies.
Why does the partial-report cue enhance performance in Landman et al.’s (2003) procedure but not in other procedures? First,
the memory retention interval is different. Although the interval
between the initial memory display and the final test display is
1,600 ms in all conditions shown in Figure 1, the partial-report cue
is delivered in the middle of that interval in Landman et al.’s
procedure. If observers start using the cue right away, then the
effective retention interval—that from memory display offset to
the refreshing of the cued item—is shorter in Landman et al.’s
study than in the other procedures. If VWM decays during that
time (the memory decay hypothesis), then performance in the
whole-report procedure should be worse than that in the retro-cue
procedure.
Second, the cuing procedure used in Landman et al.’s (2003)
study may be particularly effective at directing focused attention to
the critical item in VWM. The act of attending to the critical item
reduces the relevant memory load. This can enhance performance
1

The timing of the partial-report cue delivery was 2–12 s in Lepsien et
al. (2005).

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

ORIENTING ATTENTION IN VISUAL WORKING MEMORY

for the following reasons. First, it may restrict the comparison
between memory and probe to a single comparison (the simplifiedcomparison hypothesis) and eliminate the need to exhaustively
compare every probe item with the corresponding memory item.
Consequently, any change blindness originating from a comparison failure or decision noise is reduced (Hollingworth, 2003;
Simons, Chabris, Schnur, & Levin, 2002). Second, multiple memory items may compete for memory resources and suppress each
other’s representation (Bahcall & Kowler, 1999). Directing attention to a single memory item can release the interference from
other memory items (interitem interference), enhancing memory
performance of the critical item. Third, when attention is broadly
distributed across multiple memory items, memory for these items
may be labile and may be overwritten by the probe array. Focusing
attention on a critical memory item solidifies its memory, making
it more resistant to interference from the probe array (the probe
interference hypothesis). These three sources of enhancement will
be jointly referred to as the attentional enhancement hypothesis.
The current study focuses on the retro-cue advantage in measuring VWM. We are interested in this effect because if confirmed,
it can potentially change the way VWM is conceptualized. It
would suggest that the contents of VWM are not static but can
degrade over time or with delivery of new stimuli. The following
experiments are designed to test which of the hypotheses laid out
above best account for the cuing benefit— henceforth referred to as
the retro-cue benefit (Griffin & Nobre, 2003; Landman et al.,
2003; Lepsien et al., 2005; Makovski & Jiang, 2007).2 It is
important to note that the different hypotheses need not be mutually exclusive. It is possible that VWM is sensitive to decay, to the
complexity of memory probe comparison, to interference from the
other items in memory, and to interference from the probe. Our
experiments are designed to test which combination of these
hypotheses best accounts for the effect. Experiment 1 distinguishes
between the decay and the broader attentional enhancement hypotheses. Experiments 2 and 3 will address the different forms of
the attentional enhancement hypothesis.

Experiment 1
This experiment aims to test the memory decay hypothesis by
eliminating differences in retention intervals across conditions. If
the retro-cue benefit remains, then the decay hypothesis can be
largely ruled out. Our experiment is unique in several respects.
First, participants completed the task under articulatory suppression. On each trial they quickly rehearsed a prespecified word out
loud to reduce verbal recoding (Baddeley, 1986). Second, we tried
to equate the duration of memory retention by keeping constant the
interval between the initial encoding and the memory refreshing.
In the retro-cue condition, after an initial memory array and a
blank retention interval of 1 s, a central arrow cue was presented
for 100 ms, pointing to the location of a memory item that might
later change. Assuming that participants started to refresh their
VWM of the target item upon the onset of the cue, the effective
memory retention interval would be 1,000 ms. The probe array
was further delayed by 400 ms, such that the interstimulus interval
(ISI) between memory and probe arrays was 1,500 ms. In the
simultaneous-cue condition, after the initial memory array and a
blank retention interval of 1 s, the probe array along with a central
arrow cue was presented, pointing to the critical item that might

371

change. The effective retention interval was also 1,000 ms, but the
ISI between memory and probe arrays was 500 ms shorter than in
the retro-cue condition, so any advantage in the retro-cue condition
cannot be accounted for by differences in retention interval. Finally, in the no-cue condition, the trial sequence was the same as
in the simultaneous-cue condition except that the central arrow
was absent. Figure 2 illustrates a schematic trial sequence used in
the three different conditions. Note that the no-cue condition was
essentially a whole-report procedure, whereas the other two conditions were both partial-report procedures, with the retro-cue
condition being similar to Landman et al.’s (2003) method.
Experiment 1 went beyond a simple replication of a retro-cue
benefit. We also tested whether the effect was seen when the
memory and probe arrays did not overlap in screen locations
(Griffin & Nobre 2003; Lepsien et al., 2005). Specifically, items
on the probe array might occupy the same screen locations as items
on the memory display, or they might occupy locations that were
1.5 times expanded toward the periphery. As noted in the introduction, one explanation of the retro-cue benefit can be found in
the probe interference account, which states that VWM is vulnerable to interference from subsequent visual input unless attention
has already focused on the critical memory. This account does not
specify whether or not interference from the probe array is screen
based. If it is, expanding the probe array should reduce interference on VWM, and consequently the no-cue and simultaneous-cue
performance should improve to match that of the retro-cue.
Finally, Experiment 1 tested both color VWM and shape VWM
to ensure that the same pattern of results holds for different
memory tasks. Because VWM for color is typically better than
VWM for shape (Alvarez & Cavanagh, 2004; Eng, Chen, & Jiang,
2005), we used different memory loads for the two tasks (six
colors and four shapes).

Method
Participants. Participants tested in this study were volunteers
from Harvard University and its community. They provided informed consent and received one course credit or $10/hr. All
participants had normal or corrected-to-normal visual acuity and
normal color vision. They ranged from 18 to 31 years old. There
were 18 participants in Experiment 1.
Equipment. Participants were tested individually in a room
with normal interior lighting. They sat approximately 57 cm away
from a 19⬙ computer monitor. The experiment was programmed
with psychophysical toolbox software (Brainard, 1997; Pelli,
1997) implemented in MATLAB, which can be accessed at the
following website: http://www.mathworks.com.
Materials and trial sequence. On each trial, six unique color
disks (diameter ⫽ 1.31°) and four unique novel shapes (1.31°)
were placed equidistantly on an imaginary circle (radius ⫽ 4.92°)
centered at fixation. The background of the display was black. The
number of items was selected to exceed the conventional VWM
capacity (Alvarez & Cavanagh, 2004; Luck & Vogel, 1997).
Colors were selected randomly from nine different colors, and
2

Following Griffin and Nobre’s (2003) terminology, we used “retrocue” to capture the retrospective nature of the cue in bringing to mind
information that has disappeared. This term is sometimes contrasted with
“pre-cue,” which precedes memory encoding (Makovski & Jiang, 2007).

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

372

MAKOVSKI, SUSSMAN, AND JIANG

Figure 2. The time course of the three conditions tested in Experiment 1’s expanded conditions. The probe
array contained six colors or four shapes placed equidistantly on an imaginary circle whose radius was either the
same as the memory array (overlapped conditions) or 1.5 times greater than the memory array (expanded
conditions, shown here). Participants were told to remember the initial memory array and judge whether items
on the probe array were the same as or different from items on the memory array. On simultaneous-cue and
retro-cue trials, only the item cued by the central arrow could change.

shapes were selected from 10 novel shapes (Shuman & Kanwisher,
2004). The memory display was presented for 300 ms and followed by a blank retention interval of 1,000 ms. In the retro-cue
condition, a central white arrow (1.44° in length) was presented for
100 ms, followed by a blank interval of 400 ms, before the
presentation of the probe array. In the simultaneous-cue condition,
after the 1,000-ms blank interval, the central arrow was presented
simultaneously with the probe array for 100 ms, after which only
the probe array remained. The probe array contained six colors or
four shapes placed equidistantly on an imaginary circle whose
radius was either the same as the memory array or 1.5 times
greater, creating an overlapped condition and an expanded condition, respectively. Finally, in the no-cue condition, the presentation
sequence was the same as that of the simultaneous-cue condition,
except that the central arrow was absent.
In all conditions, participants were told to determine whether the
probe array was identical to the memory array or whether one of
the items had changed color (in the color blocks) or shape (in the
shape blocks) by pressing the S key for “same” and the D key for
“different.” They were told that when the central arrow cue was
presented, it was always 100% valid, in that items not cued would
never change. Participants were also informed that if a change
occurred to the cued item, which happened 50% of time, it would
be a new color (or shape) not presented on the memory array.
Participants were free to move their eyes.
Design. In both the color and shape tasks, we used a 3 ⫻ 2 ⫻
2 design with cue condition (retro-cue, simultaneous cue, or no
cue), spatial relation (overlapped or expanded), and item change
(present or absent) manipulated orthogonally. There were 240
trials in color VWM and 240 trials in shape VWM. Half of the

participants completed the color task first, while the other half
completed the shape task first. Trials within the color (or shape)
task were randomly intermixed in presentation order. Unlike accuracy, speed of response was not emphasized.
Articulatory suppression. To minimize verbal recoding, participants were required to rehearse out loud a three-letter word as
quickly as they could throughout a block of trials. The word they
had to rehearse was specified at the beginning of each block of 48
trials.
Data analysis. In this experiment and subsequent ones, we
calculated the percentage of correct responses, d⬘, and A⬘ (Grier,
1971; MacMillan & Creelman, 2004). Because statistical results
were the same for all indices, we report only the percentage of
correct presses. A⬘ results and mean reaction time (RT) for correct
responses for all three Experiments are listed in Tables A1, A2,
and A3 the Appendix.

Results
Figure 3 plots the mean accuracy for the color and shape tasks
separately. In both tasks, even when articulatory suppression was
used and the effective interval between encoding and retrieval was
comparable across conditions, accuracy in the retro-cue condition
was still significantly higher than that in the simultaneous-cue and
no-cue conditions, replicating Landman et al.’s (2003) results.
A repeated measures analysis of variance (ANOVA) on cue
condition (retro-cue, simultaneous cue, or no cue) and spatial
relation (overlapped vs. expanded) revealed a significant main
effect of cue condition in accuracy: for color VWM, F(2, 34) ⫽
19.87, p ⬍ .001, and for shape VWM, F(2, 34) ⫽ 8.63, p ⬍ .001.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

ORIENTING ATTENTION IN VISUAL WORKING MEMORY

373

Figure 3. Results from Experiment 1. A retro-cue significantly enhanced performance both when the probe
array and memory array overlapped in location and when they did not overlap. The error bars show standard
errors of the means.

The retro-cue condition was significantly more accurate than the
simultaneous-cue condition: in color VWM, F(1, 17) ⫽ 11.18, p ⬍
.004, and in shape VWM, F(1, 17) ⫽ 9.13, p ⬍ .006. Similarly, the
retro-cue condition was significantly more accurate than the nocue condition: in color VWM, F(1, 17) ⫽ 43.78, p ⬍ .001, and in
shape VWM, F(1, 17) ⫽ 11.84, p ⬍ .001. The presentation of a
cue simultaneously with the test display also conveyed a significant advantage in comparison with no-cue trials in color VWM,
F(1, 17) ⫽ 7.81, p ⬍ .02, but not in shape VWM, F ⬍ 1. This
advantage may be related to simplified memory comparison: With
a cue, participants only needed to make one comparison; without
a cue, they needed to make multiple comparisons (Hollingworth,
2003). This advantage was more significant for color VWM than
for shape VWM, perhaps because we used different set sizes for
color and shape tasks (i.e., without a cue, participants may need to
make six comparisons in color VWM and only four comparisons
in shape VWM).
The above analyses combined data across overlapped and expanded test conditions. Was there any difference between overlapping and expanded test displays? The ANOVA test showed that
there was not: The main effect of the memory–test spatial relationship was not significant in either color VWM, F(1, 17) ⫽ 1.66,
p ⬎ .20, or shape VWM, F ⬍ 1. Neither did this factor interact
with cue conditions: for color VWM, F(2, 34) ⫽ 1.34, p ⬎ .25, and
for shape VWM, F ⬍ 1. Simple t tests showed that the advantage
of a retro-cue over a simultaneous cue and no cue held for color
VWM as well as for shape VWM, both when the probe array
overlapped with the memory array, t(17) ⬎ 2.71, ps ⬍ .02, and
when the probe array was expanded and spatially not overlapping
with the memory array, t(17) ⬎ 2.21, ps ⬍ .05.
The retro-cue not only enhanced accuracy but also sped up RT
(see the Appendix for RT data). Even though the task instruction
emphasized accuracy and not RT, participants were faster making
a same– different judgment when the cue was presented before the
probe array than when it was presented simultaneously with the
probe array. This facilitation was seen for both the overlapped
displays and the expanded displays. The facilitation was on the
order of 150 ms (retro-cue vs. simultaneous cue) and has also been

seen in other studies (Griffin & Nobre, 2003; Makovski & Jiang,
2007). Because results from RT are generally consistent with those
from accuracy (or A⬘), we will no longer present RT in later
experiments.

Discussion
Experiment 1 showed that performance in a VWM task, as
measured by change detection, differed significantly for different
testing procedures. In comparison with a whole-report procedure
in which participants matched an entire probe array with their
memory, a partial-report procedure can lead to better performance,
but only under certain conditions. When the cue that narrowed the
whole report into a partial report was delivered simultaneously
with the probe array, it did not consistently facilitate performance.
But when the cue preceded the probe array by 500 ms, it enhanced
performance in comparison with the whole-report procedure.
These results held whether the memory array and the probe array
overlapped in screen locations or did not overlap, suggesting that
the potential interference from the probe array is not screen or
viewer based.
The findings from Experiment 1 departed from many previous
studies on the partial-report procedure, primarily in the timing of
the partial-report cue. In classic studies on iconic memory, the
partial-report cue was delivered immediately after the offset of the
memory display, allowing participants to extract information from
iconic memory (Averbach & Coriell, 1961; Becker, Pashler, &
Anstis, 2000; Sperling, 1960). In more recent studies on the
consolidation of information into VWM, Vogel et al. (2006) also
used a cue that trailed the memory display by less than 500 ms,
salvaging iconic memory or enhancing the transition between
iconic memory and VWM. In contrast, in Experiment 1 the cue
was delivered 1,000 ms after the initial memory encoding, when
iconic memory had decayed (Dilollo, 1980).
The retro-cue advantage shown in Experiment 1 cannot be
accounted for by a simple memory decay hypothesis. We equated
the interval between encoding and the refreshing of VWM across
different conditions. Indeed, the ISI between the memory and

MAKOVSKI, SUSSMAN, AND JIANG

374

probe displays was longer in the retro-cue condition than in the
other conditions, so one could not explain the retro-cue benefit as
reflecting less decay of VWM in the retro-cue condition than in the
other conditions.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Experiment 2
Why does focusing attention on the critical memory item enhance VWM performance? There are several possibilities. The
simplest possibility is that cuing simplified the memory probe
comparison process. Instead of a comparison of each probe item
with each memory item at the corresponding locations, cuing
simplified the process to a single comparison. The simplified
comparison reduces decision noise inherent to an exhaustive comparison task and reduces the kind of change blindness from a
failure to compare (Hollingworth, 2003; Simons et al., 2002).
Earlier studies had used the simultaneous-cue condition to try to
rule out the simplified-comparison hypothesis. However, there are
several reasons why participants may have not effectively used the
simultaneous cue. First, the cue is less salient when presented
concurrently with the probe array, so comparison across the whole
array may have already started before the cue was used. Second,
the presentation of the entire probe array provides a retrieval
context that may have encouraged participants to do a whole-array
comparison rather than a single-item comparison (Jiang et al.,
2000).
To test whether attentional cue enhances performance by simplifying the comparison process, in Experiment 2 we simplified the

comparison process in all conditions by eliminating irrelevant
items on the probe display. Figure 4 shows four conditions tested
in this experiment. In all conditions the probe display contained a
single test object. Participants’ task was to determine whether this
object was the same as or different from the memory object shown
previously in the same location. Because only a single comparison
needs to be made, the simplified-comparison account predicted
that the retro-cue should no longer enhance performance.

Method
Participants. Fifteen new participants from the same general
subject pool as that described for Experiment 1 completed Experiment 2.
Materials. Similar to Experiment 1, we tested color VWM and
shape VWM, but this time we randomly intermixed color and
shape trials to further remove strategic differences between the two
tasks. Memory load was six for color VWM and four for shape
VWM. The initial memory display was presented for 1,000 ms to
ensure adequate encoding time (Eng et al., 2005).
Design and procedure. In both color and shape VWM tasks,
we orthogonally manipulated whether or not there was a retro-cue
presented 500 ms before the probe display (retro-cue vs. no retrocue) and whether or not there was a central arrow cue presented
simultaneously with the probe display (simultaneous cue vs. no
simultaneous cue). With this design we can separate the effects of
a retro-cue preceding the probe display from the effects of a
simultaneous cue presented concurrently with the probe display.

Figure 4. Trial sequences of the four conditions tested in Experiment 2. The memory array contained six colors
or four shapes. Participants decided whether the single test item was the same as or different from the memory
item at that location. On cue trials, the cued item was always later probed. The top two rows show the no
simultaneous-cue conditions. The bottom two rows show the simultaneous-cue conditions.

ORIENTING ATTENTION IN VISUAL WORKING MEMORY

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Figure 4 shows a schematic illustration of the four conditions. The
design was otherwise similar to Experiment 1’s overlapped conditions, except that the probe display contained only a single probe
object that always coincided with the location of the critical
memory item. Participants were asked to press the S key if the
probe object was the same as the memory object at that location
before or to press the D key if it was not the same.
Each participant completed 320 experimental trials, divided
randomly and evenly into different conditions: 2 tasks (color or
shape) ⫻ 2 retro-cues (present vs. absent) ⫻ 2 simultaneous cues
(present vs. absent) ⫻ 2 item changes (present vs. absent) ⫻ 20
cases. Articulatory suppression was used to reduce verbal recoding.

Results
Figure 5 shows the mean percentage of correct responses separately for color and shape VWM tasks. An ANOVA for task,
retro-cue, and simultaneous cue revealed a significant main effect
of retro-cue, with higher accuracy when a retro-cue was presented
500 ms before the probe array than when it was absent, F(1, 14) ⫽
18.29, p ⬍ .01. No other main effects or interactions were significant, ps ⬎ .30. Follow-up tests showed that performance was
enhanced by the presence of a retro-cue for both color VWM, F(1,
14) ⫽ 5.84, p ⬍ .03, and shape VWM, F(1, 14) ⫽ 16.80, p ⬍ .01.
The presentation of a central arrow cue simultaneously with the
probe array did not alter performance, p ⬎ .25 for color VWM and
p ⬎ .35 for shape VWM.

Discussion
Experiment 2 showed that VWM performance was better when
the critical item was retrospectively cued. This advantage was seen
even when the probe display contained a single probe item, which
only required a single memory probe comparison. Direct comparisons across Experiments 1 and 2 revealed no interaction between
retro-cue (retro-cue vs. no cue) and experiment (whole-probe array
vs. single-probe array), F ⬍ 1. Given that the single probe already
simplified the comparison process, it should have enhanced performance whether or not it was preceded by a retro-cue. Nonetheless, we still found an attentional cuing effect, suggesting that

375

simplified comparison cannot fully account for the advantage of
attentional cuing.

Experiment 3
Why does attentional cuing enhance VWM performance, and
why is this enhancement restricted to retro-cuing? One critical
difference between retro-cuing and simultaneous cuing or singleprobe cuing is the timing of attentional allocation. With retrocuing, attention is already directed to the critical memory before
the presentation of the probe display. In contrast, it takes time for
attention to move to the cued item when the cue is concurrent with
the probe. Even when the cue is the single probe itself, it takes at
least 100 ms for attention to move to the cued location (Posner,
1980). The sensitivity of memory performance to the timing of the
cue suggests that VWM of multiple items is susceptible to degradation and that the degradation is reduced only when focused
attention is delivered without much delay.
What is the source of memory degradation? There are at least
two possibilities. First, VWM may be degraded because multiple
items in VWM may interfere with one another. This interitem
interference may result from the suppression of nearby memory
items (Bahcall & Kowler, 1999) or from incorrect binding of
different memory attributes to their proper locations (Treisman &
Zhang, 2006). Interitem degradation is removed when attention is
cued to the critical item, resulting in enhanced performance. Second, VWM can be degraded by the presentation of the probe
stimulus, which may interfere with VWM of multiple items (probe
interference). As new visual input, the probe may overwrite or
degrade the representation of memory items (Simons, 2000). It
may also disrupt the rehearsal of memory information, leading to
reduced memory performance. Focused attention on the critical
memory can reduce probe interference by consolidating the critical
memory into a durable format.
So what is the primary source of memory degradation that is
reduced by attentional cuing? We test this question by manipulating memory load from one to six items. Both interitem interference
and probe task interference accounts predict that the retro-cue
should not enhance performance when memory load is one, as
attention has already been focused on the single memory item.

Figure 5. Results of Experiment 2. Retro-cue enhanced performance even when the probe display contained
a single item. Error bars show the standard errors of the means.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

376

MAKOVSKI, SUSSMAN, AND JIANG

However, the two accounts differ in their prediction about the
cuing benefit as a function of memory load. Because interitem
competition is more dramatic for higher memory load, release
from interitem interference should be greater at higher memory
loads. In turn, attentional cuing should be greater at higher loads.
In contrast, if attentional cuing acts by reducing probe interference,
the size of the interference should be determined by the probe
stimulus, which is constant across all memory loads. The cuing
benefit should not scale with memory load.
To contrast these hypotheses, in Experiment 3 we varied memory load from one to six. Because VWM load is affected not only
by set size but also by item complexity (Alvarez & Cavanagh,
2004; Eng et al., 2005), we tested shape (a complex property) as
well as color (a simple property).

Method
Participants. Twelve participants from the same general
subject pool as that described for Experiment 1 completed
Experiment 3.
Design and procedure. We manipulated three factors orthogonally: the type of stimulus tested (color or shape), the number of
items on the memory display (from one to six, presented equidistantly along the circumference of an imaginary circle), and the
timing of the cue (retro-cue or simultaneous cue). In the retro-cue
condition, after an initial memory array (1,000 ms) and a blank
retention interval (1,000 ms), the retro-cue was presented for 100
ms, followed by a blank lag of 400 ms, before the presentation of
a test item. In the simultaneous-cue condition, the cue was presented simultaneously with the test item. Figure 6 (left) shows a
schematic illustration of the trial sequence.
Each participant completed 1,248 experimental trials (divided
into 26 blocks of 48 trials each), carried out in two 1-hr sessions.
The trials were randomly and evenly divided into different conditions. Participants completed the experiment under articulatory

suppression. In all other respects the experiment was identical to
Experiment 2.

Results
Figure 6 (right) shows mean accuracy for color and shape tasks
at different memory loads. An ANOVA confirmed that overall
accuracy was higher in the color task than in the shape task, higher
at lower memory loads, and higher with a retro-cue, all ps ⬍ .01.
The interaction between stimulus type and memory set size was
significant, F(5, 55) ⫽ 11.51, p ⬍ .01, driven by ceiling performance at a memory load of one for both color and shape VWM but
lower performance for shape than color at higher memory load.
The benefit provided by a retro-cue interacted marginally with
memory load, F(5, 55) ⫽ 2.21, p ⬍ .07. The other interactions
were not significant, ps ⬎ .25.
Follow-up tests showed that the retro-cue enhanced performance at all memory loads ( ps ⬍ .05) except for Load 1 ( p ⬎ .70).
The retro-cue enhanced performance even when there were only
two items in the memory array, p ⬍ .02 (Lepsien et al., 2005).
Most important, when a memory load of one was removed from
the analysis, the interaction between retro-cue and memory load
was not significant, F ⬍ 1. Is this lack of interaction due to
insufficient statistical power? Apparently not: When comparing
the cue effect between Set Size 1 and Set Size 2, a significant
interaction was found, F(1, 11) ⫽ 4.80, p ⬍ .05, with an observed
power of 0.61. However, when comparing Load 2 with any other
load, including Load 4 (twice that of Load 2) and Load 6 (the most
extreme value), no interaction was detected (Fs ⬍ 1). This suggests that any load effect from Load 2 or a higher load must be
substantially smaller than that from Load 1 to Load 2. Moreover,
individual data analysis revealed that the interaction between load
(Loads 2 to 6) and cue was not significant in 11 of the 12
participants. Finally, we tested the linear contrast interaction of
load and cue; that too was insignificant, F ⬍ 1. In other words, the

Figure 6. Left: Trial sequences of the two conditions tested in Experiment 3. The memory display contained
from one to six colors or shapes. Right: Results from Experiment 3; error bars represent ⫾1 SE of the retro-cue
benefit (retro-cue minus simultaneous cue). The retro-cue benefit was seen at all memory loads greater than 1
and was not greater for a higher memory load or for shapes than colors. Simu ⫽ simultaneous.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

ORIENTING ATTENTION IN VISUAL WORKING MEMORY

retro-cue benefit did not scale with memory load, even though the
attentional advantage conveyed by the release of interitem competition and suppression should be greater at higher memory load.
These results held when the dependent measure was log transformed for accuracy (Schweickert, 1985).
Finally, we calculated memory capacity on the basis of Cowan’s
K measure (Cowan, 2001), where K is an index of the estimated
number of items participants held in VWM at different memory
load. The equation for calculating K was as follows: K ⫽ memory
load ⫻ (hit ⫹ correct rejection ⫺ 1). The estimated color VWM
capacity was 2.73 in the simultaneous-cue condition and 3.5 in the
retro-cue condition. The estimated shape VWM capacity was 1.8
in the simultaneous-cue condition and 2.5 in the retro-cue condition. By this measure, the estimated capacity is 25%–28% lower if
one uses the simultaneous-cue procedure rather than the retro-cue
procedure.

Discussion
In Experiment 3, we compared the size of the retro-cue benefit
across different memory set sizes and for color and shape VWM.
We found no evidence that the retro-cue benefit increased at higher
memory loads. A significant retro-cue advantage was seen when
memory load exceeded one, but it did not change for Set Sizes 2
to 6. These results were inconsistent with the idea that attentional
cuing enhanced VWM representation by releasing interitem interference. The inter-item interference view is also inconsistent with
findings from a recent study (Makovski & Jiang, 2007), which
found no retro-cue benefit when attention was retro-cued to two of
the six memory items. Even though this condition also involved a
reduction in memory load and interitem interference, it did not
improve performance. Similarly, Sperling (1960) did not find a
retro-cue benefit when attention was cued to a row of items (rather
than to a single item) after a delay of 500 ms. Together, these
results show that the key factor for producing a retro-cue benefit is
not the reduction of memory load per se, but a fundamental change
of VWM property when attention is focused on a single memory
item. These results are better explained by the probe interference
hypothesis, according to which focused attention increased the
robustness of VWM to interference from probe displays. At Memory Load 1, attention had already been focused on the critical item,
leading to a robust form of memory. Further refreshing of its
memory provided no additional benefit. When attentional load was
greater than one, attention was initially distributed among multiple
memory items. Memory for these items is not fully consolidated in
the absence of focused attention. This memory can be degraded by
new visual input. The retro-cue focused attention on the critical
item, allowing its memory to be more resistant to probe interference.

General Discussion
VWM is usually considered a robust form of visual memory that
does not quickly decay (Makovski & Jiang, 2007; Phillips, 1974;
Vogel, Woodman, & Luck, 2001) and can be maintained across
changes in eye position (Irwin, 1992; Phillips, 1974) or across
presentation of new visual input (Miller et al., 1996). However,
recent studies using the retro-cue paradigm have challenged this
view (Griffin & Nobre, 2003; Landman et al., 2003; Lepsien et al.,

377

2005; Makovski & Jiang, 2007). Retrospectively cuing attention to
one of the memory items long after iconic memory has decayed
and transmission to VWM has completed can enhance VWM
performance. The current study clarifies the nature of the retro-cue
benefit by testing the memory decay and the attentional enhancement hypotheses. We have shown that the retro-cue benefit is not
due to memory decay, as it is observed even when the interval
between memory encoding and refreshing is longer in the retro-cue
condition than in the other conditions. Performance is enhanced by
attentional cuing, and this enhancement cannot be simply explained by reducing decision noise during the comparison process:
The use of a single test probe reduced the number of comparisons
to one without removing the retro-cue benefit. We believe that the
effect reflects an interaction between attention and VWM, in
which focused attention enhances the durability of VWM. Our
experiments further rule out the possibility that attention simply
made VWM more resistant to interference from concurrent memory load, as the attentional enhancement effect does not increase
with heavier memory load, which would have produced greater
interitem interference. Instead, we believe that the effect reflects a
change in the durability of VWM to probe interference as a
function of attentional allocation. Previous studies that use rapid
serial visual presentation have shown that the consolidation of
information into VWM relies significantly on attention. Without
focused attention, memory for a perceived stimulus is highly
vulnerable to interference from subsequent input (Chun & Potter,
1995). Orienting attention to a single item in VWM consolidates
the memory and reduces the interference produced by the probe
task. This orienting effect is accompanied by a cost to VWM of the
uncued items. Griffin and Nobre (2003) found that after attention
has been cued to one of the memory items, participants’ memory
of the other, uncued items is poor.
These results have significant theoretical and methodological
implications. At the theoretical level, they suggest a modification
to the dominant view of VWM as a robust form of visual memory.
VWM is typically considered a window into cognitive control, as
successful maintenance and retrieval of information online depends significantly on central executive processes (Baddeley,
2003; Makovski, Shim, & Jiang, 2006; Vogel, Woodman, & Luck,
3
Performance in the no-cue (or simultaneous-cue) condition was lower
than that seen in other studies (Luck & Vogel, 1997), most likely because
the colors used in this study were less saturated and distinctive in comparison with those used in other studies. However, as noted by a reviewer,
one might argue that the low performance was driven by intermixing
different cue trials, which might have led to the adoption of strategies
detrimental to the no-cue (or simultaneous-cue) condition. To rule out this
possibility, we tested 7 observers in an experiment in which the retro-cue
and simultaneous-cue conditions were either randomly mixed in presentation order or tested in separate blocks. If participants adopted strategies
detrimental to the no-cue (or simultaneous-cue) condition in the mixed
design, then the cue effect should be eliminated in the blocked design, and
performance in the no-cue (or simultaneous-cue) condition should be better
in the blocked than the mixed conditions. This, however, was not what we
found. Accuracy in the mixed design was comparable to accuracy in the
blocked design in both the no-cue conditions (64.6% vs. 65.4%, respectively) and the retro-cue conditions (73.2 % vs. 74.6%, respectively). The
main effect of cue was significant, p ⬍ .01, but the main effect of blocking
type (mixed or blocked) or their interaction was not significant.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

378

MAKOVSKI, SUSSMAN, AND JIANG

2005). This view of VWM as a reflection of top-down control has
dominated the conception of VWM, buttressed in part by the
observation that VWM does not quickly decay and that it can be
maintained across interruptions. However, several studies in
VWM have already shown that VWM is also sensitive to
bottom-up input. For example, VWM shows a dramatic recency
effect, in which the trailing array is much better retained than the
preceding arrays (Broadbent & Broadbent, 1981; Brockmole,
Wang, & Irwin, 2002; Jiang & Kumar, 2004; Phillips & Christie,
1977; Song & Jiang, 2006a). In neurophysiology, Miller and
colleagues have shown that, whereas cells in the prefrontal cortex
can maintain their selectivity over filled delays, cells in the inferior
temporal cortex do not maintain their memory selectivity over
filled delays (Miller & Desimone, 1994; Miller et al., 1996). In
human functional brain imaging, although the prefrontal and posterior parietal cortices show VWM-related activity for various
types of input (Song & Jiang, 2006b; Todd & Marois, 2004; Xu &
Chun, 2006), the inferior temporal cortex is selective to specific
stimulus type. For example, the fusiform face area shows VWM
activity for faces but not for scenes during the retention interval
(Druzgal & D’Esposito, 2003). These studies suggest that the
access to VWM may be guarded both by top-down control and by
bottom-up inputs. This view of VWM can be partly mapped onto
Baddeley (1986) and Logie’s (1995) models of working memory,
in which the central executive works in tandem with “subsidiary
systems.” The subsidiary systems, such as the visual–spatial
sketchpad, may be sensitive to obligatory updating by new input.
Although the current study does not fundamentally change the
Baddeley or Logie model of VWM, it has highlighted the need to
consider bottom-up influences, such as obligatory updating of
VWM, and this is something that has largely been neglected in
existing VWM models.
At the methodological level, this study shows that the estimation
of VWM capacity can depend significantly on the testing procedure. The standard change detection task uses a whole-report
procedure and can underestimate VWM capacity by 25%. The
retro-cue procedure, in which the critical memory item is retrospectively cued prior to probe presentation, can be considered a
better procedure, especially if one’s interest is to characterize the
upper capacity limit. Indeed, even the retro-cue procedure used
here may have underestimated VWM capacity. Although the retrocue did not overlap with the memory items in spatial locations, it
may have produced some interference, as interference from new
input is not screen or viewer based (Experiment 1). This interference must be less than that produced by the probe; otherwise, the
interference by the cue would have swamped any advantage of
attentional cuing. The lower interference by the retro-cue than by
the probe item may originate from differences in spatial location
(central vs. peripheral; far away from vs. near the initial memory
item) or differences in similarity to VWM contents.
The benefit of a retro-cue observed here is much less than that
seen in Landman et al.’s (2003) original study. Even with the
retro-cue procedure, we did not find evidence for a high-capacity
system. Two differences between our methods and those of Landman et al. (2003) could explain the disparity in results. First, the
Landman et al. study tested memory for orientation, while we
tested memory for color and shape. Strategies such as grouping
oriented lines to form a configuration may be more successful than
similar strategies for color memory or shape memory. Second,

there were only two possible orientations tested in the Landman et
al. study, and these two orientations were easily distinguished
(they were horizontal and vertical). In contrast, our experiment
tested a total of 9 colors and 10 shapes, which were probably more
similar. Given that the veridicality of VWM representation may be
graded, the ease of distinguishing items in memory can affect
memory capacity (Alvarez & Cavanagh, 2004; Eng et al., 2005;
Olsson & Poom, 2005). Thus, it is perhaps not meaningful to talk
about a magic number for VWM capacity; that number may be
highly variable, depending on the feature values selected to test
VWM (Jiang, Shim, & Makovski, 2007; Wilken & Ma, 2004).
Our study complements previous research by showing that
visual attention significantly influences VWM. Information that is
selectively attended during encoding of the prechange display
gains access to VWM (Griffin & Nobre, 2003; Lepsien et al.,
2005; Rensink, Oregan, & Clark, 1997; Schmidt, Vogel, Woodman, & Luck, 2002). After VWM encoding, attention is continuously needed to maintain information in VWM. VWM is severely
impaired if a secondary task is conducted during the delay interval
(Fougnie & Marois, 2006; Makovski et al., 2006). This interference largely arises from amodal, central attention, because an
attended auditory secondary task impairs VWM, but a passively
viewed visual stimulus barely affects VWM (Makovski et al.,
2006). What our study has added to the understanding of attention
and VWM is that attention also modulates the durability of VWM.
Memory consolidation is thus not just a matter of time (Vogel et
al., 2006) but also an act of selective attention. If attention is
distributed across multiple items, such that several items are simultaneously retained in VWM, then memory for these items is
vulnerable to interference from the test display. But the distribution of attention can change such that one of the memorized items
becomes selectively attended, in which case memory for that item
becomes more robust (Makovski & Jiang, 2007). Thus, focusing
attention retrospectively on a single item in VWM can solidify that
memory. Whether this act of attention qualitatively changes the
format of VWM is an interesting question to test in the future.

References
Alvarez, G. A., & Cavanagh, P. (2004). The capacity of visual short-term
memory is set both by visual information load and by number of objects.
Psychological Science, 15(2), 106 –111.
Averbach, E., & Coriell, A. S. (1961). Short-term memory in vision. Bell
System Technical Journal, 40, 309 –328.
Baddeley, A. D. (1986). Working memory. Oxford, England: Oxford University Press.
Baddeley, A. (2003). Working memory: Looking back and looking forward. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 4(10), 829 – 839.
Bahcall, D. O., & Kowler, E. (1999). Attentional interference at small
spatial separations. Vision Research, 39(1), 71– 86.
Becker, M. W., Pashler, H., & Anstis, S. M. (2000). The role of iconic
memory in change-detection tasks. Perception, 29(3), 273–286.
Brainard, D. H. (1997). The psychophysics toolbox. Spatial Vision, 10(4),
433– 436.
Broadbent, D. E., & Broadbent, M. H. P. (1981). Recency effects in visual
memory. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Experimental Psychology, 33(A), 1–15.
Brockmole, J. R., Wang, R. F., & Irwin, D. E. (2002). Temporal integration
between visual images and visual percepts. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 28(2), 315–334.
Chun, M. M., & Potter, M. C. (1995). A two-stage model for multiple-

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

ORIENTING ATTENTION IN VISUAL WORKING MEMORY
target detection in rapid serial visual presentation. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 21(1), 109 –
127.
Courtney, S. M., Petit, L., Haxby, J. V., & Ungerleider, L. G. (1998). The
role of prefrontal cortex in working memory: Examining the contents of
consciousness. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London, Series B, 353(1377), 1819 –1828.
Cowan, N. (2001). The magical number 4 in short-term memory: A
reconsideration of mental storage capacity. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 24(1), 87–114.
Dilollo, V. (1980). Temporal integration in visual memory. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 109(1), 75–97.
Druzgal, T. J., & D’Esposito, M. (2003). Dissecting contributions of
prefrontal cortex and fusiform face area to face working memory.
Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 15(6), 771–784.
Eng, H. Y., Chen, D. Y., & Jiang, Y. H. (2005). Visual working memory
for simple and complex visual stimuli. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review,
12(6), 1127–1133.
Fougnie, D., & Marois, R. (2006). Distinct capacity limits for attention and
working memory—Evidence from attentive tracking and visual working
memory paradigms. Psychological Science, 17(6), 526 –534.
Grier, J. B. (1971). Nonparametric indexes for sensitivity and bias—
Computing formulas. Psychological Bulletin, 75(6), 424 – 429.
Griffin, I. C., & Nobre, A. C. (2003). Orienting attention to locations in
internal representations. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 15(8),
1176 –1194.
Hollingworth, A. (2003). Failures of retrieval and comparison constrain
change detection in natural scenes. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Human Perception and Performance, 29(2), 388 – 403.
Irwin, D. E. (1992). Memory for position and identity across eye movements. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 18(2), 307–317.
Jiang, Y. H., & Kumar, A. (2004). Visual short-term memory for two
sequential arrays: One integrated representation or two separate representations? Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 11(3), 495–500.
Jiang, Y. H., Olson, I. R., & Chun, M. M. (2000). Organization of visual
short-term memory. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 26(3), 683–702.
Jiang, Y. V., Shim, W. M., & Makovski, T. (2007, November). Dissecting
effects of complexity and similarity on visual working memory. Paper
presented at the annual meeting of the Psychonomic Society, Long
Beach, CA.
Landman, R., Spekreijse, H., & Lamme, V. A. F. (2003). Large capacity
storage of integrated objects before change blindness. Vision Research,
43(2), 149 –164.
Lepsien, J., Griffin, I. C., Devlin, J. T., & Nobre, A. C. (2005). Directing
spatial attention in mental representations: Interactions between attentional
orienting and working-memory load. NeuroImage, 26(3), 733–743.
Lepsien, J., & Nobre, A. C. (2007). Attentional modulation of object representations in working memory. Cerebral Cortex, 17(9), 2072–2083.
Logie, R. H. (1995). Visual-spatial working memory. New York: Psychology Press.
Luck, S. J., & Vogel, E. K. (1997). The capacity of visual working memory
for features and conjunctions. Nature, 390(6657), 279 –281.
MacMillan, N. A., & Creelman, C. D. (2004). Detection theory: A user’s
guide. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Makovski, T., & Jiang, Y. V. (2007). Distributing versus focusing attention
in visual short-term memory. Psychonomic Bulletin and Review, 14(6),
1072–1078.
Makovski, T., Shim, W. M., & Jiang, Y. H. V. (2006). Interference from
filled delays on visual change detection. Journal of Vision, 6(12),
1459 –1470.

379

Miller, E. K., & Desimone, R. (1994). Parallel neuronal mechanisms for
short-term memory. Science, 263(5146), 520 –522.
Miller, E. K., Erickson, C. A., & Desimone, R. (1996). Neural mechanisms
of visual working memory in prefrontal cortex of the macaque. Journal
of Neuroscience, 16(16), 5154 –5167.
Neisser, U. (1967). Cognitive psychology. New York: Appleton-CenturyCrofts.
Olsson, H., & Poom, L. (2005). Visual memory needs categories. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
America, 102(24), 8776 – 8780.
Pashler, H. (1988). Familiarity and visual change detection. Perception &
Psychophysics, 44(4), 369 –378.
Pelli, D. G. (1997). The VideoToolbox software for visual psychophysics:
Transforming numbers into movies. Spatial Vision, 10(4), 437– 442.
Phillips, W. A. (1974). Distinction between sensory storage and short-term
visual memory. Perception & Psychophysics, 16(2), 283–290.
Phillips, W. A., & Christie, D. F. M. (1977). Components of visual
memory. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 29, 117–133.
Posner, M. I. (1980). Orienting of attention. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 32, 3–25.
Rensink, R. A. (2002). Change detection. Annual Review of Psychology,
53, 245–277.
Rensink, R. A., Oregan, J. K., & Clark, J. J. (1997). To see or not to see:
The need for attention to perceive changes in scenes. Psychological
Science, 8(5), 368 –373.
Schmidt, B. K., Vogel, E. K., Woodman, G. F., & Luck, S. J. (2002).
Voluntary and automatic attentional control of visual working memory.
Perception & Psychophysics, 64(5), 754 –763.
Schweickert, R. (1985). Separable effects of factors on speed and accuracy—Memory scanning, lexical decision, and choice tasks. Psychological Bulletin, 97(3), 530 –546.
Shuman, M., & Kanwisher, N. (2004). Numerical magnitude in the human
parietal lobe: Tests of representational generality and domain specificity.
Neuron, 44(3), 557–569.
Simons, D. J. (2000). Current approaches to change blindness. Visual
Cognition, 7(1–3), 1–15.
Simons, D. J., Chabris, C. F., Schnur, T., & Levin, D. T. (2002). Evidence
for preserved representations in change blindness. Consciousness and
Cognition, 11(1), 78 –97.
Song, J.-H., & Jiang, Y. V. (2006a). Motion tracking modulates capacity
allocation of visual working memory. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review,
13(6), 1011–1015.
Song, J.-H., & Jiang, Y. (2006b). Visual working memory for simple and
complex features: An fMRI study. NeuroImage, 30(3), 963–972.
Sperling, G. (1960). The information available in brief visual presentations.
Psychological Monographs, 74(11), 1–29.
Todd, J. J., & Marois, R. (2004). Capacity limit of visual short-term memory
in human posterior parietal cortex. Nature, 428(6984), 751–754.
Treisman, A., & Zhang, W. W. (2006). Location and binding in visual
working memory. Memory & Cognition, 34(8), 1704 –1719.
Vogel, E. K., Woodman, G. F., & Luck, S. J. (2001). Storage of features,
conjunctions, and objects in visual working memory. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 27(1), 92–114.
Vogel, E. K., Woodman, G. F., & Luck, S. J. (2005). Pushing around the
locus of selection: Evidence for the flexible-selection hypothesis. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 17(12), 1907–1922.
Vogel, E. K., Woodman, G. F., & Luck, S. J. (2006). The time course of
consolidation in visual working memory. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 32(6), 1436 –1451.
Wilken, P., & Ma, W. J. (2004). A detection theory account of change
detection. Journal of Vision, 4(12), 1120 –1135.
Xu, Y. D., & Chun, M. M. (2006). Dissociable neural mechanisms supporting visual short-term memory for objects. Nature, 440(7080), 91–95.

(Appendix follows)

MAKOVSKI, SUSSMAN, AND JIANG

380

Appendix
Mean Accuracy (A⬘) and Reaction Times (RTs; in Milliseconds; Correct Responses Only) in
Experiments 1–3
Table A1
Experiment 1
Color VWM

Shape VWM

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Expanded

Overlapped

Expanded

Overlapped

Measure

No cue

Simu cue

Retro-cue

No cue

Simu cue

Retro-cue

No cue

Simu cue

Retro-cue

No cue

Simu cue

Retro-cue

A⬘
RT

0.63
967

0.70
924

0.77
768

0.70
936

0.70
886

0.78
777

0.73
1038

0.72
965

0.78
805

0.75
948

0.72
909

0.80
770

Note. VWM ⫽ visual working memory; Simu ⫽ Simultaneous.

Table A2
Experiment 2
Color VWM

Shape VWM

Simu cue absent

Simu cue present

Simu cue absent

Simu cue present

Measure

No cue

Retro-cue

No cue

Retro-cue

No cue

Retro-cue

No cue

Retro-cue

A⬘
RT

0.82
963

0.85
740

0.81
956

0.86
756

0.78
974

0.86
772

0.81
965

0.85
740

Note. VWM ⫽ visual working memory; Simu ⫽ Simultaneous.

Table A3
Experiment 3
Color VWM by load
Measure and
condition
A⬘
Simu cue
Retro-cue
RT
Simu cue
Retro-cue

Shape VWM by load

1

2

3

4

5

6

1

2

3

4

5

6

0.97
0.97

0.96
0.97

0.91
0.95

0.91
0.93

0.86
0.90

0.83
0.88

0.97
0.98

0.94
0.96

0.86
0.92

0.82
0.87

0.78
0.84

0.69
0.72

784
672

849
696

887
699

887
697

945
742

924
731

779
695

888
737

912
728

948
761

948
770

975
765

Note. VWM ⫽ visual working memory; Simu ⫽ Simultaneous.

Received December 7, 2006
Revision received October 26, 2007
Accepted November 1, 2007 䡲

