Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition
2008, Vol. 34, No. 1, 230 –236

Copyright 2008 by the American Psychological Association
0278-7393/08/$12.00 DOI: 10.1037/0278-7393.34.1.230

Accelerated Relearning After Retrieval-Induced Forgetting:
The Benefit of Being Forgotten
Benjamin C. Storm, Elizabeth Ligon Bjork, and Robert A. Bjork

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

University of California, Los Angeles
Research on retrieval-induced forgetting has demonstrated that retrieving some information from memory can cause the forgetting of other information in memory. Here, the authors report research on the
relearning of items that have been subjected to retrieval-induced forgetting. Participants studied a list of
category– exemplar pairs, underwent a series of retrieval-practice and relearning trials, and, finally, were
tested on the initially studied pairs. The final recall of non-relearned items exhibited a cumulative effect
of retrieval-induced forgetting such that the size of the effect increased with each block of retrieval
practice. Of most interest, and very surprising from a common-sense standpoint, items that were
relearned benefited more from that relearning if they had previously been forgotten. The results offer
insights into the nature and durability of retrieval-induced forgetting and provide additional evidence that
forgetting is an enabler—rather than a disabler— of future learning.
Keywords: retrieval-induced forgetting, inhibition, learning, memory, forgetting

The adaptive and essential role of forgetting in memory is
mostly unappreciated. As William James (1890) argued, however
. . . “In the practical use of our intellect, forgetting is as important
a function as recollecting” (p. 679). Memories become irrelevant
and outdated, and without some means of forgetting or setting
aside such memories, learning and accessing new and relevant
memories would become steadily more difficult. One way in
which it appears that this form of goal-directed forgetting is
accomplished is through retrieval inhibition (e.g., E. L. Bjork,
Bjork, & Anderson, 1998; R. A. Bjork, 1989) or the executive
control processes of inhibition (Anderson, 2003). As proposed by
these researchers, in searching for a particular item in memory,
other items that are related, but incorrect, can vie for access.
Inhibitory control is recruited to select against and decrease the
accessibility of such interfering items, facilitating access to the
target item. As research on retrieval-induced forgetting has shown
(e.g., Anderson, Bjork, & Bjork, 1994), this inhibition can have
lasting consequences.
Retrieval-induced forgetting is typically studied by researchers
using a paradigm consisting of three phases: study, retrieval practice, and test (Anderson et al., 1994). Participants study a series of
category– exemplar pairs (e.g., fruit: lemon; profession: accountant; fruit: orange) and then retrieve half of the exemplars from
half of the categories via guided retrieval practice (e.g., fruit:
le_____). Practiced exemplars are referred to as Rp⫹ items, nonpracticed exemplars from practiced categories are referred to as
Rp– items (e.g., orange), and nonpracticed exemplars from nonpracticed categories are referred to as Nrp items (e.g., accountant).
Not surprisingly, Rp⫹ items are better recalled than are both Rp–

and Nrp items on a final delayed test; more important, however,
Rp– items are less well recalled than are Nrp items. This impairment of Rp– items, referred to as retrieval-induced forgetting, is
surprising because there are reasons to expect Rp– items to benefit,
not suffer, from the retrieval of Rp⫹ items (e.g., spreading activation, covert rehearsal).
In the years since Anderson et al. (1994) demonstrated retrievalinduced forgetting, researchers have attempted to uncover the
mechanisms underlying the phenomenon. According to interference or blocking-based accounts, retrieval-induced forgetting occurs because of the strengthening of the association between the
retrieval cue and practiced exemplars (Rp⫹ items), which then
interfere with the later recall of nonpracticed exemplars (Rp–
items) associated with the same retrieval cue. According to
inhibition-based accounts, however, retrieval-induced forgetting
occurs because of competition that arises during retrieval practice.
While attempting to retrieve target exemplars (Rp⫹ items) during
retrieval practice, other exemplars interfere with those retrieval
attempts and must therefore be selected against. Intrinsic to this
selection process is the inhibition of the competing items, which is
then presumed to impair their later recall. Observations that
retrieval-induced forgetting is cue-independent (e.g., Anderson &
Spellman, 1995), interference dependent (e.g., Storm, Bjork, &
Bjork, 2007), retrieval specific, and strength independent (e.g.,
Anderson, Bjork, & Bjork, 2000; Bauml, 2002) have generally
supported the inhibitory account. It should be noted, however, that
the debate is far from over, and many researchers remain reluctant
to endorse an inhibitory explanation of retrieval-induced forgetting
(see, e.g., Butler, Williams, Maki, & Zacks, 2001; MacLeod,
Dodd, Sheard, Wilson, & Bibi, 2003; Perfect et al., 2004).

Benjamin C. Storm, Elizabeth Ligon Bjork, and Robert A. Bjork,
Department of Psychology, University of California, Los Angeles.
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Benjamin
C. Storm, Department of Psychology, University of California, Los Angeles, Box 951563, Los Angeles, CA 90095. E-mail: storm@ucla.edu

Logic of the Present Study
There has been extensive research on the nature, generality, and
boundary conditions of retrieval-induced forgetting. The focus of
the present research is, instead, on the relearning of items that have
230

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

BRIEF REPORTS

been subjected to retrieval-induced forgetting. Intrinsic to the
concept of retrieval inhibition (see R. A. Bjork, 2007) is that such
inhibition entails a temporary inability to retrieve information from
memory, not a permanent loss. The accessibility of potentially
interfering information is reduced but in a way that maintains a
representation of that information in memory and, presumably,
renders it relearnable at an accelerated rate compared with the
relearning of new information, should it again be needed. Thus,
retrieval inhibition is an adaptive mechanism (R. A. Bjork, 1989;
see also E. L. Bjork & Bjork, 1988), and, from that perspective, the
impairment of Rp– items should not persist after both Rp– and Nrp
items are relearned.
Beyond that broad consideration, the present research was motivated by a counterintuitive prediction derived from the assumptions of the new theory of disuse (R. A. Bjork & Bjork, 1992), a
theoretical framework that motivated, in part, the original research
on retrieval-induced forgetting. According to the theory, and consistent with a distinction that a number of learning theorists of
various persuasions have postulated tracing back decades (e.g.,
Estes, 1955; Hull, 1943), an item’s representation in memory is
indexed by two dissociable strengths: its storage strength, which
represents how entrenched or interassociated the item is with other
items in memory, and its retrieval strength, which reflects how
accessible the item is at a given point in time in response to a given
cue or configuration of cues. The likelihood that an item can be
recalled at a given point in time is assumed to be solely a function
of its current retrieval strength. Storage strength, which corresponds roughly to degree of learning, is a latent variable that acts
to retard the loss of retrieval strength across a retention interval
and enhances the gain of retrieval strength during relearning.
Furthermore, once storage strength is accumulated, it is assumed
never to be lost.
A key assumption of the theory in the present context is that
increments in retrieval strength and storage strength that result
from an opportunity to recall or restudy are assumed to be a
decreasing function of the item’s current retrieval strength. That is,
the theory assumes, counterintuitively, that the more accessible an
item is at a given point in time or in a certain context, the less that
item stands to benefit when it is relearned. If, in keeping with the
theory, the occurrence of retrieval-induced forgetting reflects only
a decrease in retrieval strength of Rp– items, not their storage
strength, relearning of Rp– items should actually bring them to a
higher level than that of comparable relearned Nrp items. Thus, not
only might Rp– items recover from inhibition following reexposure but they might even become more recallable than items that
were also reexposed but never inhibited in the first place.
Although the foregoing hypothesis may seem counterintuitive,
several types of evidence indicate that forgetting can enhance,
rather than reduce, learning. R. A. Bjork and Allen (1970), for
example, increased the forgetting of studied items by manipulating
the difficulty of a number-shadowing task that was interpolated
before the studied items were either tested or studied again. Difficult number shadowing produced more forgetting than did easy
number shadowing, but the converse was true when another study
trial was provided, and the information was tested at a delay.
Cuddy and Jacoby (1982) obtained an analogous result when they
manipulated the similarity of the interpolated task to the to-beremembered material. After a relearning trial, the condition pro-

231

ducing the most forgetting of the first study event (the similar task)
produced the best recall on a delayed test.
The spacing effect (see, e.g., Dempster, 1996) constitutes another demonstration that forgetting can enable learning. The longer
the interval between an initial study trial and a second study trial,
the more forgetting that occurs of the first trial. Such spacing,
however, tends to enhance, not impair, long-term recall. Finally,
Smith, Glenberg, and Bjork (1978) demonstrated that changing the
environmental context from a first study session to a second study
session on the same material increased forgetting of the first study
session but enhanced learning—as measured by subsequent recall
in a novel context.
These results and others suggest that diminishing the retrieval
strength or accessibility of information in memory prior to relearning can facilitate the effectiveness of relearning. We hypothesized,
therefore, that items subjected to retrieval-induced forgetting
would benefit more from subsequent relearning than would items
not initially forgotten—perhaps even to the point of rendering such
items more recallable after relearning than they would have been
had they not been subjected to retrieval-induced forgetting. More
specifically, although the accessibility of nonpracticed items from
practiced categories (Rp– items) may have been impaired relative
to baseline (Nrp items) initially, we predicted that difference
would reverse after both types of items were relearned.

Method
We tested our hypothesis by having participants undergo a
series of retrieval-practice and relearning cycles that were designed to induce and eliminate the effects of retrieval-induced
forgetting repeatedly.

Participants
A total of 240 undergraduate students from the University of
California, Los Angeles (73 men and 167 women) averaging 20.7
years of age participated in the experiment.

Materials
Eight categories, each containing six exemplars of high taxonomic strength, no two of which began with the same first letter,
were used in the present study. The eight experimental categories
were first divided into two separate sets of four so that—for any
individual participant— half of the categories received retrieval
practice, and the other half did not. The two subsets were further
divided into two sets of two such that half of the categories
receiving retrieval practice and half of the categories not receiving
retrieval practice were either relearned or not relearned. Thus, for
any 1 participant, there were two practiced categories that were
relearned and two practiced categories that were not relearned and,
also, two unpracticed categories that were relearned and two
unpracticed categories that were not relearned.
During retrieval practice, participants were shown a series of
category names and two-letter stems that began associated exemplars of relatively low taxonomic frequency. The targets of this
retrieval practice were always extralist items—that is, items that
were not presented during the study phase of the experiment.
Although this procedure differs from the typical retrieval-practice

BRIEF REPORTS

232

paradigm—as Bauml (2002) and Storm, Bjork, Bjork, and
Nestojko (2006) have demonstrated—retrieval-induced forgetting
is also obtained when participants generate extralist exemplars
during retrieval practice. Thus, for a given subject, all six exemplars of a given category presented during the study phase served
either as Rp– items or as Nrp items. The experiment was counterbalanced such that studied exemplars were associated with every
experimental condition equally often across participants.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Procedure
The experiment was conducted in three main phases: study,
retrieval practice/relearning, and test.
Study phase. Forty-eight category– exemplar pairs were presented via computer at a rate of one pair per second. The presentation order was set randomly with the constraint that no two
consecutive pairs were from the same category.
Retrieval-practice/relearning phase. The retrieval-practice/
relearning phase immediately followed the study phase. Participants were randomly assigned to one of the following five conditions, which are shown in schematic form in Figure 1: (a)
participants receiving one block of retrieval practice; (b) participants receiving one block of retrieval practice, followed by one
block of relearning; (c) participants receiving one block of retrieval practice, followed by one block of relearning, and then a
second block of retrieval practice; (d) participants receiving one
block of retrieval practice, followed by one block of relearning, a
second block of retrieval practice, and then a second block of
relearning; (e) participants receiving one block of retrieval practice, followed by one block of relearning, a second block of
retrieval practice, a second block of relearning, and then a third
block of retrieval practice. Although the same cues were provided
during the retrieval-practice blocks, and the same items were
relearned in subsequent relearning blocks, the order of their presentation was different in each block.
A block of retrieval practice consisted of 24 extralist categoryplus-two-letter-stem cues (6 from each of the 4 practiced categories for that subject) appearing on the screen for 5 s each, with the
participants instructed to write down the particular exemplar that
completed the two-letter stem. None of the letter-stem cues began
with the same letter as any item from the same category that had

been presented in the study phase. Each block of relearning consisted of the re-presentations of all of the category– exemplar pairs
from the two practiced categories and the two unpracticed categories that were to be relearned for that subject. Each relearning
block contained 24 pairs (6 from each of those 4 categories)
presented in random order and for 1 s each.
Final testing phase. After completing the retrieval-practice/
relearning phase and a subsequent 5-min intervening task, participants were given a category-plus-one-letter-stem cued-recall test
for all of the 48 originally studied category– exemplar pairs. Each
cue was presented for 3 s, and the participants responded out loud
for the experimenter to record.

Results
Performance During Retrieval Practice
Participants successfully generated exemplars 31% (SE ⫽ 0.01),
34% (SE ⫽ 0.01), and 37% (SE ⫽ 0.02) of the time in the first,
second, and third blocks of retrieval practice, respectively.

Cued-Recall Performance
The mean correct recall proportions on the final cued-recall test
for exemplars exposed during the study phase as a function of their
being relearned or not relearned and being Rp– or Nrp items are
presented for each of the five groups of participants in Figure 2. A
5 (retrieval-practice/relearning condition: 1 vs. 2 vs. 3 vs. 4 vs.
5) ⫻ 2 (relearning: not relearned vs. relearned) ⫻ 2 (retrievalpractice status: Rp– vs. Nrp) mixed design analysis of variance
(ANOVA) was conducted, with the retrieval-practice/relearning
manipulation serving as the only between-subjects variable. All
main effects and interactions, including the three-way interaction,
were statistically significant (see Table 1 for ANOVA results).
Given the complex nature of the design and the specific nature of
our research questions, several separate analyses were conducted
to explore the effects of forgetting and relearning. As can be seen
in Figure 2, however, the data appear to support our predictions:
Retrieval practice induced the forgetting of items from practiced
categories relative to items from nonpracticed categories; these
forgotten items benefited more from relearning than nonforgotten

Group 1

Study

Rp

Test

Study

Rp

Relearn

Test

Study

Rp

Relearn

Rp

Test

Study

Rp

Relearn

Rp

Relearn

Test

Rp

Relearn

Rp

Relearn

Rp

Test

Group 2
Group 3
Group 4
Group 5

Study

Figure 1. Schematic illustration demonstrating the five between-subjects retrieval-practice/relearning conditions. Participants in each condition were tested 5 min after finishing the final block of either retrieval practice
or relearning, depending on the condition. Rp ⫽ retrieval practice.

Proportion of Items Recalled

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

BRIEF REPORTS

233

50%

Relearned

40%

RpNrp

30%
Not Relearned

20%
Group 1

Rp
Rp

Group 2

Group 3

Group 4

Group 5

Rp, Re

Rp, Re, Rp

Rp, Re, Rp,
Re

Rp, Re, Rp,
Re, Rp

Rel

Rp

Rel

Rp

Retrieval Practice/Relearning Condition
Figure 2. The mean proportion of items recalled during the final test as a function of experimental condition,
item type (Rp⫺ vs. Nrp), and whether such items were relearned or not relearned. Rp– ⫽ nonpracticed
exemplars from practiced categories; Nrp ⫽ nonpracticed exemplars from nonpracticed categories; Rp ⫽
retrieval practice; Re ⫽ relearning.

items, and retrieval-induced forgetting was not only eliminated
following relearning but it was reversed.1

Retrieval-Induced Forgetting for Non-Relearned Items
Recall data for non-relearned categories in all conditions were
subjected to a 2 (Rp– vs. Nrp) ⫻ 3 (one block of retrieval practice
[Conditions 1 and 2] vs. two blocks of retrieval practice [Conditions 3 and 4] vs. three blocks of retrieval practice [Condition 5])
mixed design ANOVA, with the number of retrieval-practice
blocks serving as a between-subjects variable. Overall, a significant retrieval-induced-forgetting effect was found. Recall perfor-

Table 1
Analysis of Variance Results for Final Cued-Recall Performance
Source

F

Relearning
Retrieval practice status
Condition
Relearning ⫻ Retrieval Practice Status
Relearning ⫻ Condition
Retrieval Practice Status ⫻ Condition
Relearning ⫻ Retrieval Practice Status
⫻ Condition
*

p ⬍ .05.

**

p ⬍ .01.

***

p ⬍ .001.

dfs

MSE

157.88
10.02**
5.77***
8.46**
14.90***
2.49*

1, 235
1, 235
4, 235
1, 235
4, 235
4, 235

2.92
0.15
0.24
0.12
0.28
0.04

3.03*

4, 235

0.04

***

mance for items from categories that received retrieval practice
(Rp– items: M ⫽ 0.26, SE ⫽ 0.01) was significantly worse than for
items from categories that did not receive retrieval practice (Nrp
items: M ⫽ 0.31, SE ⫽ 0.01), F(1, 237) ⫽ 22.50, p ⬍ .001, MSE ⫽
0.315.
As shown in Table 2, the effect of retrieval practice on the recall
of Rp– versus Nrp items interacted significantly with the number
of retrieval-practice blocks, F(2, 237) ⫽ 3.89, p ⬍ .05, MSE ⫽
0.05. Whereas participants receiving one block of retrieval practice
demonstrated very little retrieval-induced forgetting (mean for Rp–
items ⫽ 0.29, SE ⫽ 0.01 vs. mean for Nrp items ⫽ 0.30, SE ⫽
0.01), participants receiving two blocks (mean for Rp– items ⫽
0.26, SE ⫽ 0.01 vs. mean for Nrp items ⫽ 0.31, SE ⫽ 0.01) and
three blocks (mean for Rp– items ⫽ 0.22, SE ⫽ 0.02 vs. mean for
Nrp items ⫽ 0.31, SE ⫽ 0.02) of retrieval practice demonstrated
substantially more forgetting, respectively. The difference in the
magnitude was statistically significant in the one-block condition
compared with the three-blocks condition, t(142) ⫽ 2.75, p ⬍ .01,
1
As can be seen in Figure 2, recall performance for non-relearned Rp–
items in Condition 2 was a bit strange. As such items were not relearned
or related to any items that received retrieval practice, it is unclear why
they should have been recalled any differently than non-relearned Rp–
items in Condition 1. It should be noted, however, that the difference
between the recall of such items in Condition 1 and Condition 2 did not
reach statistical significance, t(94) ⫽ 1.85, p ⬎ .05.

BRIEF REPORTS

234

Table 2
Mean Category-Plus-Stem Cued-Recall Rates for Non-Relearned
Rp⫺ and Nrp Items From Participants Who Either Received
One, Two, or Three Blocks of Retrieval Practice
Item type
Rp⫺
No. of retrieval
practice blocks

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

One block
Two blocks
Three blocks

Nrp

M

SE

M

SE

0.29
0.26
0.22

0.01
0.01
0.02

0.30
0.31
0.31

0.01
0.01
0.02

Note. Rp⫺ ⫽ nonpracticed exemplars from practiced categories; Nrp ⫽
nonpracticed exemplars from nonpracticed categories.

approached significance when comparing the one- and two-blocks
conditions, t(190) ⫽ 1.91, p ⫽ .06, and did not reach significance
when comparing the two- and three-blocks conditions, t(142) ⫽
1.03, p ⬎ .05.

Effect of Relearning on Rp⫺ and Nrp Items
To assess the effect of relearning on items that were subjected to
retrieval-induced forgetting prior to their relearning versus those
that were not, we compared recall for Rp– versus Nrp items in
Conditions 1 and 3 (where the test did not occur after a block of
relearning) with that obtained for these two types of items in
Conditions 2 and 4 (where the test occurred after a block of
relearning). We did so by means of a 2 (Rp– vs. Nrp) ⫻ 2 (not after
relearning vs. after relearning) mixed design ANOVA, with not
after relearning versus after relearning serving as the betweensubjects variable. Overall, a significant main effect of relearning
was found such that items were more recallable after relearning
(M ⫽ 0.44, SE ⫽ 0.01) than they were without relearning (M ⫽
0.33, SE ⫽ 0.01), F(1, 190) ⫽ 28.77, p ⬍ .001, MSE ⫽ 0.99. More
important, however, the effect of relearning was significantly
larger for Rp– items than it was for Nrp items, F(1, 190) ⫽ 10.49,
p ⬍ .001, MSE ⫽ 0.15. Whereas Nrp items were recalled at a rate
of 0.36 (SE ⫽ 0.02) and 0.42 (SE ⫽ 0.02) before and after
relearning, respectively, Rp– items were recalled at a rate of 0.31
(SE ⫽ 0.02) and 0.45 (SE ⫽ 0.02) before and after relearning,
respectively. These results strongly support our hypothesis that
Rp– items benefit more from relearning than do their Nrp counterparts. Two t tests were conducted to test for effects of retrievalinduced forgetting before and after relearning. Whereas significant
retrieval-induced forgetting was found for items before relearning,
t(95) ⫽ 2.79, p ⬍ .01, near-significant retrieval-induced facilitation was found for items after relearning, t(95) ⫽ 1.84, p ⫽ .07.
Furthermore, as can be seen in Figure 2, the size of the retrievalinduced-facilitation effect appeared to be larger for participants in
Condition 4 (⫹0.05) than for participants in Condition 2 (⫹0.02).
Although this difference was not statistically significant, F(1,
94) ⫽ 0.60, p ⬎ .05, it is consistent with the idea that repeated
cycles of inhibition and reexposure may increase the storage
strength of items in memory, thereby making them more recallable
once the inhibition is released. It is possible that with additional
cycles, the amount of retrieval-induced facilitation would have
continued to increase.

Effect of Repeated Inhibition and Reexposure
A separate analysis explored recall performance of participants
in Condition 5, who had engaged in three blocks of retrieval
practice interpolated with two blocks of relearning. A 2 (Rp– vs.
Nrp) ⫻ 2 (not relearned vs. relearned) repeated measures ANOVA
demonstrated main effects of both relearning, F(1, 47) ⫽ 72.32,
p ⬍ .001, MSE ⫽ 1.38, and retrieval-induced forgetting, F(1,
47) ⫽ 5.56, p ⬍ .05, MSE ⫽ 0.07. More important, a significant
interaction emerged such that a larger retrieval-induced-forgetting
effect was observed for items that were never relearned (mean for
Rp– items ⫽ 0.22, SE ⫽ 0.02 vs. mean for Nrp items ⫽ 0.31, SE ⫽
0.02) than for items that were intermittently relearned (mean for
Rp– items ⫽ 0.44, SE ⫽ 0.03 vs. mean for Nrp items ⫽ 0.43, SE ⫽
0.02), F(1, 47) ⫽ 8.30, p ⬍ .01, MSE ⫽ 0.13. We believe that
relearned items did suffer from retrieval-induced forgetting but
that their impairment was offset by the additional benefits accrued
during previous blocks of relearning. As can be seen in Figure 2,
relearned Rp– items in Condition 5 tended to be recalled less well
than relearned Rp– items in Condition 4, t(94) ⫽ 1.47, p ⫽ .14,
indicating that some retrieval-induced forgetting had occurred
even after multiple blocks of retrieval practice and relearning had
taken place.

Discussion
In the present research, we explored whether the relearning of
items that had been the target of retrieval-induced forgetting would
restore the recall of such items to a level comparable with the
relearning of items never exposed to retrieval-induced forgetting.
Participants studied a list of category– exemplar pairs, took part in
one of five between-subjects retrieval-practice/relearning conditions, and were then tested on the initially studied pairs. On the
basis of assumptions of the new theory of disuse (R. A. Bjork &
Bjork, 1992) and on research demonstrating the importance of
forgetting in creating effective conditions for future learning, we
predicted that such forgotten items would benefit more from
relearning than would their nonforgotten counterparts. In fact,
retrieval-induced-forgetting effects were not only eliminated after
relearning but they were, if anything, reversed.
It may seem reasonable, or at least not totally surprising, that
relearning of items subjected to retrieval-induced forgetting would
override that forgetting, but that such forgetting would be more
than overridden by relearning is genuinely surprising. This finding
is, however, consistent with a counterintuitive prediction of the
new theory of disuse (R. A. Bjork & Bjork, 1992)—namely, that
the extent to which an item benefits from relearning is a decreasing
function of the accessibility or retrieval strength of that item at the
time of relearning. Thus, owing to their being forgotten, Rp– items
are predicted by the theory to benefit more from relearning than
are Nrp items. Furthermore, under the assumption that retrievalinduced forgetting reflects only a decrease in retrieval strength, not
storage strength, the predicted greater increment in storage
strength of Rp– items over Nrp items owing to the relearning phase
should render Rp– items more recallable than Nrp after a sufficient
delay. This prediction follows because storage strength is assumed
to retard the loss of retrieval strength—that is, retard observed
forgetting—so access to relearned Rp– items will be lost more
slowly than will access to relearned Nrp items, meaning that the

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

BRIEF REPORTS

recall of Rp– items, relative to Nrp items, should increase with
delay.
In certain respects, the present results are problematic for noninhibitory accounts of retrieval-induced forgetting, such as blocking. If the impairment of Rp– items at test was caused by interference from strengthened Rp⫹ items, there seems every reason to
assume that this impairment would persist, even after intermittent
relearning. Although relearning cycles should make both Rp– and
Nrp items more accessible, only Rp– items have competing exemplars strengthened during retrieval practice—and, thus, only
Rp– items should be susceptible to the effects of interference at
test. In other words, if retrieval-induced forgetting was caused by
interference at test, that interference should also have been observed even after the relearning of Rp– and Nrp items.
The current results also suggest that retrieval-induced forgetting
does not reflect the permanent loss of items in memory. Had this
been the case, items suffering from retrieval-induced forgetting
should have remained less recallable even after relearning. Rather,
the current results suggest that if retrieval-induced forgetting is
caused by inhibition, that inhibition reflects the temporary inability
to retrieve items from memory. Given that the supposed purpose of
inhibitory control is to resolve interference from competing items
(Anderson, 2003; Anderson et al., 1994; E. L. Bjork et al., 1998),
this distinction makes sense. It is not the storage strength of related
items that determines whether they will compete during the retrieval process, it is their retrieval strength. Thus, to reduce competition during retrieval, the current accessibility of competing
items (retrieval strength) needs to be reduced, not the permanent
storage (storage strength) of those items, which would have nonadaptive consequences in other contexts in which those items are
relevant.
Studies of retrieval-induced forgetting have typically required
participants to retrieve exemplars multiple times during retrieval
practice. Anderson et al. (1994), for example, had participants
undergo retrieval practice for half of the exemplars from half of the
categories three times each. Although some researchers have argued that numerous retrieval-practice trials are not necessary to
induce forgetting (e.g., Macrae & MacLeod, 1999), it seems reasonable that having more retrieval-practice trials should increase
the number of opportunities for competing items to be inhibited.
Even though items inhibited during a particular retrieval-practice
phase should become less accessible—and, hence, less competing— during a subsequent retrieval-practice phase, other not-yetinhibited items may still compete. Basically, as long as there are
competitors still accessible in memory, additional retrieval practice
should continue to result in additional retrieval-induced forgetting.
Consistent with this idea, the magnitude of the retrieval-inducedforgetting effect for non-relearned items in the present study
increased systematically with the number of retrieval-practice
blocks.
That additional retrieval practice leads to increased retrievalinduced forgetting has important implications for researchers who
employ the retrieval-practice paradigm. Retrieval-inducedforgetting effects are often quite small. The results observed here
(and recently by others, e.g., Johnson & Anderson, 2004; Levy,
McVeigh, Marful, & Anderson, 2007) suggest that increasing the
number of retrieval-practice trials may offer an effective means of
increasing the size of the effect.

235

Concluding Comments
It is natural to think of forgetting and learning as forces in
constant competition—that once some level of learning is accomplished, forgetting sets in to undo, so to speak, some or all of that
learning. Most people may be able to appreciate that individuals
can relearn what has been forgotten faster than individuals learning
something for the first time, but most people would certainly also
assume that it is best not to forget. That relearning should be
enhanced by remembering, not by forgetting, seems an unassailable idea. As with many dynamics in human memory, however,
common sense proves to be a poor guide. On the basis of these and
other findings, it appears that rather than undoing learning, forgetting creates conditions that enhance the effectiveness of learning.
Finally, it is worth noting that the present research, though
motivated by theoretical issues, has provocative implications for a
practical matter: the optimization of instruction. There exist a set
of manipulations—labeled desirable difficulties by R. A. Bjork
(1994), such as variation, spacing, and contextual interference—
that share the property that they create difficulties for the learner
and appear to slow the rate of learning but then often enhance
long-term retention and transfer. Perhaps retrieval-induced forgetting, incorporated in some creative way during instruction, has the
potential to serve as an innovative and unintuitive desirable difficulty.

References
Anderson, M. C. (2003). Rethinking interference theory: Executive control
and the mechanisms of forgetting. Journal of Memory and Language,
49, 415– 445.
Anderson, M. C., Bjork, E. L., & Bjork, R. A. (2000). Retrieval-induced
forgetting: Evidence for a recall-specific mechanism. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 7, 522–530.
Anderson, M. C., Bjork, R. A., & Bjork, E. L. (1994). Remembering can
cause forgetting: Retrieval dynamics in long-term memory. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 20, 1063–
1087.
Anderson, M. C., & Spellman, B. A. (1995). On the status of inhibitory
mechanisms in cognition: Memory retrieval as a model case. Psychological Review, 102, 68 –100.
Bauml, K. (2002). Semantic generation can cause episodic forgetting.
Psychological Science, 13, 356 –360.
Bjork, E. L., & Bjork, R. A. (1988). On the adaptive aspects of retrieval
failure in autobiographical memory. In M. M. Gruneberg, P. E. Morris,
& R. N. Sykes (Eds.), Practical aspects of memory II (pp. 283–288).
London: Wiley.
Bjork, E. L., Bjork, R. A., & Anderson, M. C. (1998). Varieties of
goal-directed forgetting. In J. M. Golding & C. MacLeod (Eds.), Intentional forgetting: Interdisciplinary approaches (pp. 103–137). Hillsdale,
NJ: Erlbaum.
Bjork, R. A. (1989). Retrieval-inhibition as an adaptive mechanism in
human memory. In H. L. Roediger & F. I. M. Craik (Eds.), Varieties of
memory and consciousness: Essays in honor of Endel Tulving (pp.
309 –330). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Bjork, R. A. (1994). Memory and metamemory considerations in the
training of human beings. In J. Metcalfe & A. Shimamura (Eds.),
Metacognition: Knowing about knowing (pp. 185–205). Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Bjork, R. A. (2007). Inhibition: An essential and contentious concept. In
H. L. Roediger, Y. Dudai, & S. M. Fitzpatrick (Eds.), Science of
memory: Concepts (pp. 307–313). Oxford, England: Oxford University
Press.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

236

BRIEF REPORTS

Bjork, R. A., & Allen, T. W. (1970). The spacing effect: Consolidation or
differential encoding. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior,
9, 567–572.
Bjork, R. A., & Bjork, E. L. (1992). A new theory of disuse and an old
theory of stimulus fluctuation. In A. Healy, S. Kosslyn, & R. Shiffrin
(Eds.), From learning processes to cognitive processes: Essays in honor
of William K. Estes. (Vol. 2, pp. 35– 67). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Butler, K. M., Williams, C. C., Maki, R. H., & Zacks, R. T. (2001). A limit
on retrieval-induced forgetting. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 27, 1314 –1319.
Cuddy, L. J., & Jacoby, L. L. (1982). When forgetting helps memory: An
analysis of repetition effects. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal
Behavior, 21, 451– 467.
Dempster, F. N. (1996). Distributing and managing the conditions of
encoding and practice. In E. L. Bjork & R. A. Bjork (Eds.), Handbook
of perception and cognition (Vol. 10, pp. 317–344). New York: Academic Press.
Estes, W. K. (1955). Statistical theory of spontaneous recovery and regression. Psychological Review, 62, 145–154.
Hull, C. L. (1943). The principles of behavior. New York: AppletonCentury-Crofts.
James, W. (1890). The principles of psychology (Vol. 1). New York: Holt.
Johnson, S. K., & Anderson, M. C. (2004). The role of inhibitory control
in forgetting semantic knowledge. Psychological Science, 15, 448 – 453.
Levy, B. J., McVeigh, N. D., Marful, A., & Anderson, M. C. (2007).

Inhibiting your native language: The role of retrieval-induced forgetting
during second language acquisition. Psychological Science, 18, 29 –34.
MacLeod, C. M., Dodd, M. D., Sheard, E. D., Wilson, D. E., & Bibi, U.
(2003). In opposition to inhibition. In B. H. Ross (Ed.), The psychology
of learning and motivation: Advances in research and theory (Vol. 43,
pp. 163–214). New York: Elsevier Science.
Macrae, C. N., & MacLeod, M. D. (1999). On recollections lost: When
practice makes imperfect. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
77, 463– 473.
Perfect, T. J., Stark, L. J., Tree, J. J., Moulin, C. J. A., Ahmed, L., & Hutter,
R. (2004). Transfer appropriate forgetting: The cue-dependent nature of
retrieval-induced forgetting. Journal of Memory and Language, 51,
399 – 417.
Smith, S. M., Glenberg, A., & Bjork, R. A. (1978). Environmental context
and human memory. Memory & Cognition, 6, 342–353.
Storm, B. C., Bjork, E. L., & Bjork, R. A. (2007). When intended
remembering leads to unintended forgetting. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 60, 909 –915.
Storm, B. C., Bjork, E. L., Bjork, R. A., & Nestojko, J. F. (2006). Is
retrieval success a necessary condition for retrieval-induced forgetting?
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 13, 1023–1027.

Received May 23, 2007
Revision received October 5, 2007
Accepted October 8, 2007 䡲

