Journal of Personality and Social Psychology
2008, Vol. 95, No. 1, 76 –93

Copyright 2008 by the American Psychological Association
0022-3514/08/$12.00 DOI: 10.1037/0022-3514.95.1.76

The Rejection of Moral Rebels: Resenting Those Who Do the Right Thing
Benoı̂t Monin

Pamela J. Sawyer

Stanford University

University of California, Santa Barbara

Matthew J. Marquez

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

New York
Four studies document the rejection of moral rebels. In Study 1, participants who made a counterattitudinal speech disliked a person who refused on principle to do so, but uninvolved observers preferred
this rebel to an obedient other. In Study 2, participants taking part in a racist task disliked a rebel who
refused to go along, but mere observers did not. This rejection was mediated by the perception that rebels
would reject obedient participants (Study 3), but did not occur when participants described an important
trait or value beforehand (Study 4). Together, these studies suggest that rebels are resented when their
implicit reproach threatens the positive self-image of individuals who did not rebel.
Keywords: moral rebels, whistleblowers, implicit moral reproach, resentment, self-affirmation

shunned for years by fellow soldiers and received numerous death
threats (My Lai Massacre, 2006); Frank Serpico was shot in the
face in a suspected setup by fellow NYPD officers, prompting him
to leave the country for a decade (Maas, 1973); and Joseph Darby
had to be taken into protective military custody at an undisclosed
location after receiving various threats from former colleagues
(Rosin, 2004). The violence of this backlash against whistleblowers and rebels is surprising precisely because the exact same
behavior draws admiration and respect from observers not directly
involved in the situation—and also because this rejection does not
just come from peers who stand to suffer from the rebellion, but
also from peers who merely failed to report or oppose the abuse.
A similarly puzzling reversal is captured in a variation of
Milgram’s (1965) obedience paradigm. Whereas readers of the
original studies typically applaud the third of participants who
refused to shock the victim all the way as strong, reliable, and
altruistic moral exemplars, obedient participants had a very different opinion. When naı̈ve participants were paired with confederates instructed to stand up against the experimenter (Milgram,
1965, Study 2), those participants who kept shocking the victim
throughout the procedure were quick to put down rebels at debriefing. Instead of seeing rebels as strong, they thought, for
example, that rebels were “just being ridiculous” and that they
“lost all control of themselves” (p. 132). Instead of seeing rebels as
reliable, they thought that they should not have quit (“They came
here for an experiment, and I think they should have stuck with it,”
p. 132). Instead of seeing rebels as altruistic, they saw them as
ignoring the needs of the experimenter (“If [. . . ] I did the same,
I don’t know how many months and days you’d have to continue
before you got done,” p. 132). Just as in the case of the moral
rebels depicted in news reports, the exact same behavior seems to
be sanctified by some, and despised by others, depending on their
involvement in the situation.
The goal of this article was to document and understand this
backlash against moral rebels. We define moral rebels as individuals who take a principled stand against the status quo, who refuse

Rebels hold a special place in social psychology. In a field that
often underscores the evils (and the power) of conformity and
obedience, people willing to go against the grain in the name of
their principles are presented as the lone exceptions that restore our
faith in human nature. When we report classic findings showing
that a majority of people agree to hurt an innocent victim (Milgram, 1974), fail to help a person in need (Latané & Darley, 1970),
or simply conform to an erroneous pronouncement (Asch, 1956),
we find solace in the fact that a minority of respondents hold their
own and do the honorable thing. Accounts of the notorious 1968
My Lai massacre (My Lai Massacre, 2006) contrast the destructive
obedience of William Calley and his men with the decency of
Hugh Thompson Jr., the helicopter pilot who stopped the massacre
by standing up against Calley. We celebrate men like Frank
Serpico, the New York Police Department (NYPD) police officer
who took a stand against corruption at a time when it was rampant
in the force (Maas, 1973). And one would hope that Joseph Darby,
the military policeman who turned in the Abu Ghraib picture CD
to authorities, will similarly go down in history as a hero who
prevented further abuse.

Disliking Moral Rebels
It may therefore come as a surprise that these inspiring rebels all
suffered intense backlash from their peers. Hugh Thompson was

Benoı̂t Monin, Department of Psychology, Stanford University; Pamela
J. Sawyer, Department of Psychology, University of California, Santa
Barbara; Matthew Marquez, New York City, New York.
We thank Adam D. Galinsky, Jennifer Whitson, Katie Liljenquist, and
Brian C. Cadena for their assistance with Study 1; Kieran S. O’Connor for
data collection in Study 4; and Lauren A. Calderon, Adam D. Galinsky,
Dale T. Miller, and Leaf Van Boven for extremely helpful feedback on
previous versions of this manuscript.
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Benoı̂t
Monin, Department of Psychology, Jordan Hall, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305. E-mail: monin@stanford.edu
76

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

THE REJECTION OF MORAL REBELS

to comply, stay silent, or simply go along when this would require
that they compromise their values. We predict that their rebellion
will be inspiring to uninvolved observers (e.g., civilians hearing of
Joseph Darby, or readers of Milgram’s obedience studies) but
threatening to people in the situation (e.g., coworkers of Joseph
Darby who did not report similar abuses, obedient participants in
Milgram’s studies), whose own behavior is implicitly called into
question and who will dislike rebels as a result. Although we
started with dramatic examples, this threat can be observed in
everyday settings. When a doctor decides to refuse lavish gifts
from drug companies, we would predict that this gesture would
inspire more respect from residents than from fellow doctors who
have accepted such perks in the past and may perceive this refusal
as an implicit indictment. When a student refuses, on principle, to
download pirated music from the Internet, we would predict that
this choice makes the student more likable to peers who do not
own computers and have never had the opportunity to download a
song than to peers who routinely download pirated music without
(until now) a second thought.

The Root of Resentment: Imagined Reproach Is a Threat
to the Self
Where does this backlash come from? In the examples above,
personal involvement seems to be an important moderator of the
reaction to moral rebels. Rebels may think that they are only taking
a stand against the status quo, but bystanders who did not take that
stand can take this rebellion as a personal threat. This suggests that
the root of resentment may be that the rebel’s choice implicitly
condemns the perceiver’s own behavior and that this potential
reproach shakes the perceiver’s confidence in being a good, moral
person (their sense of “moral and adaptive adequacy”; Steele,
1988, p. 262; see also Sherman & Cohen, 2006). Milgram (1965)
described how “the reaction of the defiant confederate defines the
act of shocking the victim as improper” and how “each additional
shock administered by the naı̈ve subject now carries with it a
measure of social disapproval from the two [defiant] confederates”
(p. 133). We propose that the rebel does not even need to be in the
room, nor does he or she need to know of the actor’s behavior, for
his or her stance to be threatening; his or her gesture alone stands
as a claim “defining the act as improper.” Nonrebels basically
assume that rebels espouse the indictment of passivity attributed to
Black Panther activist Eldridge Cleaver that “you’re either part of
the solution, or you’re part of the problem” (Cleaver, 1969, p.
xxxii)—and no one likes to be called part of the problem. By
taking a moral stand, rebels imply that it is wrong for anyone else
not to do the same because moral dictates are by definition universal (Frankena, 1973; Turiel, 1983). By claiming the moral high
ground, rebels are effectively calling everything else the low road.
Moral reproach, even imagined, can be extremely threatening to
individuals’ sense of adequacy. Sabini and Silver (1982) noted
how sensitive individuals are to moral reproach because of the
centrality of morality in most people’s self-concept (Allison, Messick, & Goethals, 1989) and because they are aware of the social
stigma that accompanies having one’s morality questioned (Park,
Ybarra, & Stanik, 2007). It may therefore not be surprising that
actors have little fondness for someone whose behavior amounts to
a wag of the finger at their own. Other people’s moral claims, and
the perception that they could look down on us for our choices,

77

might shake our confidence in our own adequacy. Only the most
self-confident of individuals would welcome such an implicit
challenge with equanimity. If that is the case, then manipulations
that comfort individuals that they are good, able people (selfaffirmation; Steele, 1988) and that have been shown to reduce the
threat of superior others (Spencer, Fein, & Lomore, 2001) might
reduce the need to put down moral rebels to protect the self.
Two things need to be stressed about this imagined reproach:
First, we propose that it is not necessary for moral rebels to
condemn explicitly those who did not rebel. The very fact of taking
a moral stance should be perceived as an implied reproach against
(and implicit rejection of) those not making the same choice.
Second, virtual reproach may be enough to trigger resentment,
with no need for the rebel to ever actually know of the conformist’s behavior. A newspaper article or Web site castigating our way
of life can be irritating even if the authors never met us. And by
extension, a moral rebel seen on television may irk a viewer whose
behavior is implicitly called in question, even if there is no chance
that the rebel will ever meet or for that matter form a judgment
about the viewer. It is the fact that the rebel most likely would
reproach the viewer (and the ensuing self-threat) that triggers the
rejection, whereas an unvested bystander might embrace the rebel.

Righteous Indignation or Self-Righteous Whininess?
Now that we have articulated what we believe to be the underlying causes of the rejection, let us elaborate on its content: What
personality dimensions are rebels put down on? A striking feature
of our opening examples is that the exact same behavior can be
constructed in such different ways depending on the perceiver’s
involvement. One reason why it is easy to demote moral behavior
might precisely be because individuals hold multiple moral prototypes, so they can opportunistically emphasize the aspect of
morality that best preserves their self-image. Walker and Hennig
(2004) identified just, brave, and caring as three distinct moral
prototypes, corresponding to different profiles in the twodimensional space defined by agency/dominance and communion/
nurturance. As in the Milgram (1965) example above, observers
may see rebels as the embodiment of righteous agency (closer to
Walker and Hennig’s “brave” prototype) for standing up against an
unjust situation, whereas threatened actors may deny that it took
any strength of character to rebel and instead define the rebel’s
stance in terms of lack of communion (further from the “caring”
prototype). Besides overall social attraction, the studies presented
here therefore strive to identify the dimensions of interpersonal
judgment used by individuals when encountering moral rebels,
paying particular attention to the dimensions of communion and
agency.

Testing the Model
We now describe more formally the hypotheses being proposed
and outline the studies that we present to test them.

Hypotheses
To facilitate the evaluation of the claims presented here, three
hypotheses (and six related predictions) can be formulated.

MONIN, SAWYER, AND MARQUEZ

78

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Hypothesis 1: The Perversity of Obedience
The simple fact of obeying in a problematic situation should
make individuals like a rebel less (relative to an obedient other).
Thus, obedient actors not only go along with a problematic situation but also perversely become its guardian by putting down
those who resist it. This predicted interaction could be broken
down into two simple effects:
Prediction 1a: Rejection by actors. Actors should like rebels
less than they like obedient others. They should not give rebels any
credit for their rebellious behavior (no agency or morality effect)
and justify rejecting rebels by casting them as not very nice people
(low communion). Studies 1, 2, 3, and 4 tested this prediction.
Prediction 1b: Attraction by observers. Observers, however,
should like rebels more than they like obedient others. They should
appreciate the rebels’ strength of character (higher agency) and
moral righteousness (higher ratings of morality), regardless of how
nice rebels are seen to be (no communion effect). Studies 1, 2, and
3 tested this prediction.

Hypothesis 2: Preemptive Rejection
The first step in triggering resentment is the perception that
rebels look down on those who did not rebel, and they would reject
them if they met them. Rejection would therefore be a preemptive
strike, to put down someone who is in a position to put down the
actor. From this hypothesis, we can make two concrete predictions.
Prediction 2a: Imagined rejection. Actors should expect to be
liked and respected less by rebels than by obedient others. Studies
3 and 4 tested this prediction.
Prediction 2b: mediation. Rejection of rebels should be a
function of how much actors imagine that they would be rejected
by rebels. Studies 3 and 4 tested this prediction.

Hypothesis 3: Self-Threat
The second step in explaining resentment is that reproach, even
imagined, shakes actors’ overall sense of self-worth. The rejection
of rebels would be an attempt to deny this vulnerability and to
preserve one’s sense of being a good person. If this is true, then
individuals who have been secured in their moral and adaptive
adequacy, that is, self-affirmed (Steele, 1988), should show less
need to reject rebels or deny the implications of their stance.
Prediction 3a: Self-affirmation opens the heart. Self-affirmed
actors should not feel a need to reject rebels as much as individuals
less secure in their sense of self-worth, even if they still believe
that rebels would dislike them. Study 4 tested this prediction.
Prediction 3b: Self-affirmation opens the eyes. Not needing to
deny the rebels’ gesture to protect a fragile sense of worth, selfaffirmed actors should be able to recognize its value and draw
appropriate conclusions about their own behavior. Study 4 tested
this prediction.

Overview of the Present Studies
We present four studies testing the hypothesis that a moral rebel
is rejected when others are personally threatened by the rebellion
as an implied condemnation of their own conformity. In all four
studies, participants in the focal experimental condition agree to go
along with a problematic request from the experimenter (speaking

against their beliefs in Study 1, playing a racist game in Studies
2– 4), only to discover after the fact that another participant (actually a confederate) refused, on principled grounds, to comply
with the experimenter. Control participants rate an obedient confederate, or are not asked to perform the problematic task beforehand, or both. Furthermore, Study 3 assessed the role of imagined
rejection as a factor in resentment by testing whether rejection is
mediated by the fear of being rejected by the rebel, and Study 4
tested the involvement of self-threat by testing whether buttressing
one’s sense of self-worth and integrity through self-affirmation
(Sherman & Cohen, 2006; Steele, 1988) eliminates the rejection of
moral rebels.

Study 1: Writing a Problematic Speech
We used a variation of the induced compliance paradigm (Galinsky, Stone, & Cooper, 2000; Zanna & Cooper, 1974) in Study
1 to first investigate the rejection of moral rebels. In this classic
procedure of the cognitive dissonance literature, participants write
a speech that goes against their own attitude, and when they
perceive that they could have easily refused to write (high-choice
condition), they tend to change their attitude in line with their
speech, presumably to reduce the dissonance created by writing it
(Festinger, 1957). Participants who are simply told to write the
speech with no room for refusal (low-choice condition) do not
typically change their attitude as much.
We focused on the latter condition, reasoning that low-choice
participants were similar to obedient observers of moral rebels:
They are unquestionably going along with a behavior that goes
against their own attitude and that, they believe, will have concrete
negative consequences (Cooper & Fazio, 1984; Scher & Cooper,
1989). They have ample motive to stand up for their own attitude,
and yet they do not. And we know from the results of high-choice
conditions that without the safety blanket of the low-choice manipulation, they would feel a measure of discomfort associated
with misrepresenting their true self. So how would they react to the
news that another participant in the same condition refused to go
along? As in the real-world examples presented above, we predicted that disinterested raters (observers) would like and admire a
rebel standing up for his or her opinion more than an obedient
other (Prediction 1b) but that participants who have themselves
gone along with the problematic behavior (actors) by agreeing to
write a counterattitudinal speech in a low-choice condition would
instead reject the rebel (Prediction 1a).
Beyond this global rejection (which we measured with liking
and respect items), we wanted to document the nature of the
impressions formed about the rebels by actors and observers, and
in particular to document the role of agency and communion in the
perception of rebels. In the introduction, we posited that observers
would see rebels as strong individuals (higher agency), but not
necessarily nicer than obedient others (no effect on communion),
in line with Prediction 1b, whereas actors would definitely see
rebels as not very nice (lower communion) and not give them
credit for being strong either (no effect on agency), in line with
Prediction 1a. Compared with obedient others, rebels should thus
be rated higher on agency by observers (Prediction 1b), and lower
on communion by actors (Prediction 1a).

THE REJECTION OF MORAL REBELS

79

Method
Participants and Design

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Seventy undergraduates at a large U.S. private university (24
men, 35 women, 11 unreported) took part in this experiment in a
laboratory setting in exchange for $10. Thirty-five first completed
the actor version of the experiment, and 35 others were recruited
1 month later from the same population to complete the observer
version.1 In both versions of the study, participants were randomly
assigned to hearing a rebel or an obedient other, resulting in a 2
(actor vs. observer) ⫻ 2 (rebel vs. obedient) between-subjects design.
The experimenter was either a White man or a White woman.

Procedure
Participants in the actor version took part in the low-choice
version of an induced compliance paradigm (Zanna & Cooper,
1974). Under the guise of studying the relationship between perception of personality and cogency of arguments, the experimenter
told participants to make a speech in favor of eliminating the
reading week (a class-free period preceding final examinations), a
proposal that we knew was very unpopular in our participant
population. To instantiate foreseeable aversive consequences
(Cooper & Fazio, 1984), we told participants that the tapes would
go to the “Undergraduate Committee on Curriculum,” which allegedly funded the project and would probably use the arguments
when deciding on the reading week. Participants were given a few
minutes to prepare their speech, recorded it on their own, completed some questionnaires, and were then introduced to the “personality perception” part of the experiment. In this section, they
listened to a tape allegedly recorded by a previous participant in
the same setting and used the scales provided (see the Measures
section below) to indicate what they thought of the other person.
The tape that they listened to contained the rebellion manipulation—in the obedient condition, the other complied, and in the
rebel condition, he or she rebelled (see the Appendix for scripts of
tapes).
In the observer version, participants were given a detailed written description of the instructions (allegedly) received by the
recorded speakers. These instructions matched the ones actually
used with actors in the induced compliance paradigm. They then
listened to the same audiotapes as actors did and rated the speaker,
without making a speech of their own. In all conditions, the gender
of the speaker was matched with that of the participant.

Measures
Under the guise of investigating the relationship between personality and cogency of arguments, participants rated the speaker
on 14 7-point bipolar scales anchored on stupid–intelligent, weak–
strong, insecure– confident, passive–active, cruel– kind, awful–
nice, cold–warm, dishonest– honest, unfair–fair, unpleasant–
pleasant, dependent–independent, stingy– generous, immature–
mature, and low self-esteem– high self-esteem. Participants then
indicated, on 7-point scales, ranging from ⫺3 (dislike very much)
to ⫹ 3 (like very much), how much they would like to work on a
class project with the speaker, how much they would like the
speaker as a friend, and how much they would like the speaker as
a roommate. Then, they listed three personality traits that came to

Figure 1. Attraction means (⫾ 1 SE) by rebellion condition and role in
Study 1. Whereas observers prefer a rebel to an obedient other, actors
prefer an obedient other, going as far as disliking the moral rebel.

their mind to describe the speaker, reported how much choice they
thought they had in making the speech that they gave (actors only),
indicated how much they respected the person on the tape on a
7-point scale ranging from ⫺3 (despise a great deal) to ⫹3
(respect a great deal), and finally estimated how the speaker felt
about eliminating the reading week, on a scale ranging from 1
(strongly disagree) to 11 (strongly agree).

Results
Suspicion
Ten participants (out of 70) expressed suspicion at debriefing—
not uncommon with this type of procedure (see Galinsky et al.,
2000). We conducted the analyses below with the 60 nonsuspicious participants first, but results and significance levels for the
main analyses were the same with all 70 participants.

Attraction
We created an index of attraction by averaging scores on liking
as a friend, as a roommate, on a project, and respect (Cronbach’s
␣ ⫽ .80) and conducted a Rebellion (rebel, obedient) ⫻ Role
(actor, observer) analysis of variance (ANOVA) on this index. As
predicted, we found a significant interaction between role and
rebellion, F(1, 56) ⫽ 11.00, p ⫽ .002, MSE ⫽ 1.20, partial ␩2 ⫽
.16, due to the fact that observers preferred the rebel (M ⫽ 0.90,
SD ⫽ 0.87) to the obedient target (M ⫽ 0.07, SD ⫽ 1.51), t(56) ⫽
2.22, p ⫽ .03, d ⫽ ⫺0.72, whereas actors preferred the obedient
other (M ⫽ 0.59, SD ⫽ 0.70) to the rebel (M ⫽ ⫺0.50, SD ⫽
1.21), t(56) ⫽ 2.46, p ⫽ .02, d ⫽ 1.19 (see Figure 1). Neither of
the main effects was significant (both ps ⬎ .13, partial ␩2 ⬍ .05).
1
Participants were not randomly assigned to the actor or observer group,
but all were drawn from the same population, and we had no reason to
suspect any systematic preexisting differences between the two groups.
Studies 2– 4 remedy this issue by randomly assigning participants to all
conditions.

MONIN, SAWYER, AND MARQUEZ

80

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Agency and Communion
We first conducted a principal axis factor analysis with a Promax rotation (as recommended by Russell, 2002) on the trait
ratings, which suggested a two-factor solution (using the scree plot
method) capturing over 62% of the variance. We created two
factors by averaging traits with loadings higher than .5 on one and
only one factor, yielding a nonoverlapping solution that included
most traits (but excluded fair, which loaded less than .5 on both
factors). The first factor (agency) averaged independent, strong,
confident, active, high self-esteem, honest, intelligent, and mature
(Cronbach’s ␣ ⫽ .93), whereas the second factor (communion)
averaged pleasant, generous, warm, kind, and nice (Cronbach’s
␣ ⫽ .86, and r ⫽ .18, ns, between the two aggregates).
The Role ⫻ Rebellion ANOVA conducted on agency revealed
a significant main effect for role, F(1, 56) ⫽ 5.99, p ⫽ .02, MSE ⫽
1.23, partial ␩2 ⫽ .10, qualified by a significant interaction, F(1,
56) ⫽ 5.43, p ⬍ .05, partial ␩2 ⫽ .09. As predicted, observers saw
rebels as more agentic than obedient others, t(56) ⫽ 3.69, p ⬍ 001,
whereas actors did not, t(56) ⫽ .08, ns. The same analysis on
communion revealed a marginal main effect for rebellion, F(1,
56) ⫽ 3.80, p ⬍ .06, MSE ⫽ .71, partial ␩2 ⫽ .06, but no
significant interaction, F(1, 56) ⫽ 1.9, p ⫽ .18, partial ␩2 ⫽ .03,
despite the fact that actors rated rebels lower on communion than
obedient others, t(56) ⫽ 2.17, p ⫽ .03, whereas observers showed
no such difference, t(56) ⫽ 0.45, ns.

Other Variables
We had asked actors to rate how much choice they thought they
had in making the speech on a 9-point scale ranging from 1 (not at
all) to 9 (a lot). Actors who saw a rebel reported feeling more
freedom (M ⫽ 3.91, SD ⫽ 2.70) than actors who saw an obedient
other (M ⫽ 1.85, SD ⫽ 1.34), t(22) ⫽ ⫺2.43, p ⫽ .02, but this
score was not correlated with the attraction composite, r(22) ⫽ .12,
ns. We also asked participants how the other participant felt about
eliminating reading week and submitted this variable to a Role ⫻
Rebellion ANOVA. Not surprisingly, participants believed that the
rebel was more against it than the obedient other, F(1, 54) ⫽
80.50, p ⬍ .001, MSE ⫽ 2.97, but neither the main effect of role
( p ⬎ .11) nor the interaction ( p ⬎ .38) was significant.

Yet, the exact same behavior led to liking or rejection, solely as a
function of participants’ involvement in the problematic situation.

Study 2: Going Along With a Racist Task
Study 2 was designed to provide a second demonstration of the
rejection of moral rebels, in a less ambiguously moral domain
(racism), and using the minimal case in which the problematic
compliance does not entail writing a tedious speech, but instead
just pointing the finger at an obvious suspect. We replaced the
morally problematic behavior of misrepresenting one’s views
(Study 1) with going along with a racist task. The stimuli in this
task reflected stereotypes about African Americans as criminals,
and although bowing to the demands of the task did not per se
reflect prejudice on the part of the participant, the moral rebel in
Study 2 questioned whether it was even appropriate to take part in
a situation that contains offensive elements. As in Study 1, we
predicted that observers should like this stance more than obedience (Prediction 1b), whereas actors who complied with the task
should prefer obedience (Prediction 1a).
Rather than delve into traditional domains of conservative morality,
we used prejudice, an issue known to elicit compunction (see Devine,
Monteith, Zuwerink, & Elliot, 1991) in an otherwise morally relativistic participant population. Students receive ample warnings from the
day they arrive on campus about the ills of prejudice and discrimination, raising strong motivations not to be or be seen as prejudiced
(Plant & Devine, 1998). Furthermore, the contemporary moral heroes
that our participants have been exposed to even before graduating
from high school are often involved in the fight against prejudice (e.g.,
Martin Luther King Jr., Gandhi, Nelson Mandela, Oskar Schindler),
thus reinforcing the link between prejudice and morality and the
exemplarity of standing up against it.
Individuals who confront prejudice may be modern moral heroes, but they are typically less appealing to the targets of their
invectives (Czopp, Monteith, & Mark, 2006). In Study 2, the moral
rebel never directly confronted participants, but we varied his or
her self-relevance by manipulating whether participants witnessed
his or her refusal before or after they had complied with the racist
task. In line with our perversity of obedience hypothesis (Hypothesis 1), we predicted that the same behavior, standing up against
prejudice, would inspire liking or rejection, depending on this
manipulation of threat.

Method
Discussion
Study 1 provides initial support for our perversity of obedience
hypothesis (Hypothesis 1), that the same act of rebellion can be
liked by some and rejected by others, depending on whether the
rebel’s behavior can be seen as an implicit indictment of the
judges’ own actions. Considered in the abstract and from a disinterested standpoint, rebels were liked better and even seen as more
agentic than obedient others (supporting Prediction 1b), but when
participants had already engaged in the problematic task that rebels
were standing up against (writing a speech supporting a widely
unpopular policy), rebels were now liked significantly less than
obedient others (supporting Prediction 1a). As posited above, this
effect was obtained even though rebels never explicitly reproached
the participants, nor would they ever concretely be in a position to
do so, having left the laboratory before the participants arrived.

Participants
Fifty-six undergraduates at a large U.S. private university (13
Whites, 17 Asians, 2 Mexicans, 2 East Asians, 1 Pacific Islander,
1 Arab, 20 unreported2; 19 women, 37 men) were approached by
an Hispanic male in their dormitory during a summer session and
agreed to complete a short questionnaire.

Procedure and Design
Participants were told that the study was about perceptions of
personality and that they would need to judge the personality of a
2
Due to experimenter oversight, ethnicity was not recorded for the first
20 participants. However, throughout the procedure, the experimenter only
approached students who did not appear to be African American.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

THE REJECTION OF MORAL REBELS

previous participant solely on the basis of his or her responses to
a questionnaire. They were randomly assigned to either the observer or the actor condition, which was essentially an order
manipulation. In the observer condition, they first rated the alleged
other participant (the “target”) and then completed the same task
themselves. The experimenter handed them a blank rating sheet
and shuffled through a stack of completed questionnaires (the
“police decision task,” see below), apparently picking one randomly for them to rate. In reality, all completed questionnaires
were prepared to manipulate rebellion by the target. After finishing
the ratings, observers were given a blank version of the police
decision task and asked to complete it themselves. In contrast,
participants in the actor condition were first given the blank
decision task to complete, and only after they had turned in their
own sheet did they receive a survey allegedly completed by the
target, along with a rating sheet. Within each of the role conditions
(actor vs. observer), participants were randomly assigned to one of
two rebellion conditions (obedient vs. rebel), yielding four cells.

Stimuli
The police decision task was presented on a single sheet with
three pictures. It started with “Imagine that a burglary has happened in a neighborhood, and the police have apprehended three
suspects. Below are brief descriptions of the three suspects. Please
consider these carefully and indicate who you think is most likely
to be guilty.” Below these instructions were three photographs,
each accompanied by some information (name, alibi, previous
record, possessions when apprehended, action when apprehended,
occupation), presented in tabular format. Under this information,
the instructions went on, “Imagine that you are the detective in
charge of this case. Please circle the face of the person who you
think is most likely to have committed the burglary. In the space
below, indicate the reasons for your suspicion,” followed by an
empty box with eight blank lines.
The information provided in the table was designed to incriminate the third suspect, Steven Jones: He had no alibi, he had a
previous record, he was carrying cash and a screwdriver, and he
was unemployed. Steven Jones was also the only African American in the display; the other two suspects were White. Participants
encountered this task twice: once blank for them to complete and
once filled out to instantiate the rebellion manipulation.
In the obedient condition, the African American face was circled, and the handwriting in the box said, “I think Steven Jones did
it because 1) He’s got no real alibi, 2) He’s done it before, and 3)
He’s carrying a lot of cash, especially for someone without a job.
The screwdriver might have helped to break open a door, etc.” In
the rebel condition, no face was circled, and the box said, “I refuse
to make a choice here—this task is obviously biased. . . . Offensive
to make black man the obvious suspect. I refuse to play this game.”

Measures
Participants formed an impression of the alleged previous participant and reported this on a personality rating form similar to the
one used in Study 1, except that the order of attraction and
personality traits was reversed. Participants first indicated on 11point scales ranging from ⫺5 (dislike very much) to ⫹5 (like very
much) how much they would like the other person to work on a

81

project, as a friend, and as a roommate. They indicated how much
they respected the other person on an 11-point scale ranging from
⫺5 (despise very much) to ⫹5 (respect very much). In an openended format, they were asked to indicate the personality trait that
they thought best described the other participant. Finally, they
rated the other’s personality on 16 7-point semantic differentials
ranging from ⫺3 to ⫹3 and anchored at stupid–intelligent, weak–
strong, unpleasant–pleasant, insecure– confident, immature–
mature, passive–active, cruel– kind, awful–nice, cold–warm,
dishonest– honest, unfair–fair, immoral–moral, dependent–
independent, selfish– generous, low self-esteem– high self-esteem,
and rude–polite.

Results
Excluded Participants
Three participants (out of 56) expressed suspicion at debriefing
and were not included in the analyses presented below. Only 4
actors picked a White suspect as the most likely culprit. Because
we did not expect participants to be threatened by the rebel if they
had not picked the African American suspect, we excluded these 4
participants from subsequent analyses (leaving 49 valid participants). We repeated the main analyses with all 56 original participants and found that patterns and significance level were the same
with all participants.

Is the Rebellion Moral?
We first compared ratings of rebel and obedient others by
observers (who, being more disinterested, should give us more of
a baseline) on the immoral–moral semantic differential. Observers
thought that rebels were significantly more moral (M ⫽ 1.17,
SD ⫽ 1.19) than obedient others (M ⫽ 0.31, SD ⫽ 0.85), t(23) ⫽
2.08, p ⬍ .05. This suggests that rebellion in the police decision
task had a moral flavor for participants. Interestingly, looking at
morality ratings for actors, there was absolutely no difference
between rebels (M ⫽ 0.33, SD ⫽ 1.30) and compliant others (M ⫽
0.33, SD ⫽ 0.39), as if actors refused to give rebels moral credit
for their good deed.

Attraction
We created an index of attraction to the target by averaging
scores on liking as a friend, as a roommate, on a project, and
respect (Cronbach’s ␣ ⫽ .82) and conducted a Rebellion (rebel,
obedient) ⫻ Role (actor, observer) ANOVA on this index. As
predicted, we found a significant interaction between role and
rebellion, F(1, 45) ⫽ 4.38, p ⫽ .04, MSE ⫽ 2.88, partial ␩2 ⫽ .09,
due to the fact that actors marginally preferred the obedient other
(M ⫽ 0.50, SD ⫽ 1.34) to the rebel (M ⫽ ⫺0.67, SD ⫽ 2.03),
t(45) ⫽ 1.68, p ⬍ .10, d ⫽ 0.71, whereas observers did not have
a significant preference between the rebel (M ⫽ 0.98, SD ⫽ 1.64)
and the obedient target (M ⫽ 0.12, SD ⫽ 1.71), t(45) ⫽ 1.27, p ⫽
.21, d ⫽ ⫺0.53. Neither of the main effects was significant (both
ps ⬎ .20, partial ␩2 ⬍ .04).

Open-Ended Responses
Although we have focused on continuous variables above, nowhere is the effect better grasped than by simply looking at the

MONIN, SAWYER, AND MARQUEZ

82

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

trait that participants suggested to describe the rebel: Whereas
observers called the rebel “strong” (twice), “strong-minded,” “independent,” “decisive,” “fair-minded,” “socially conscious,” “adamant,” or “not racist” (with only three observers calling the rebel
“proud,” “blunt,” or “self-righteous”), actors viewing the exact
same stimulus called the rebel “self-righteous” (twice), “defensive,” “opinionated,” “confused,” “easily offended,” and “racist”
(with only four actors calling the rebel “stalwart,” “quirky,”
“bold,” or “intelligent”). In fact, valence ratings of these traits in
Studies 1 and 2 by judges blind to condition yield the same
significant cross-over interaction. (We do not present these analyses only because they are entirely redundant with the Likert scale
data.)

Agency and Communion
As before, we conducted a principal axis factor analysis with a
Promax rotation on the trait ratings. The scree plot this time
suggested three factors explaining 54% of the variance, and using
the criterion that a trait needed to load on one (and only one) factor
.45 or higher to be included, we formed a first factor (agency) by
averaging confident, high self-esteem, independent, strong, moral,
honest, fair, and active (␣ ⫽ .88), a second factor (social skill) by
averaging polite, pleasant, intelligent, and mature (␣ ⫽ .80), and
a third factor (communion) by averaging warm, nice, and generous
(␣ ⫽ .72). In this new set of traits, kind did not join any factor,
loading lower than .34 on all three. Agency correlated with social
skills, r(47) ⫽ .36, p ⫽ .01, but not significantly with communion,
r(47) ⫽ .17, p ⫽ .25, whereas communion and social skills
correlated highest, r(47) ⫽ .40, p ⫽ .004.
The Role ⫻ Rebellion ANOVA conducted on each of these
three factors revealed a significant interaction on agency, F(1,
45) ⫽ 4.01, p ⫽ .05, MSE ⫽ .95, partial ␩2 ⫽ .08, and a marginal
one on communion, F(1, 45) ⫽ 3.38, p ⫽ .07, MSE ⫽ .51, partial
␩2 ⫽ .07, but none for social skills, F(1, 45) ⬍ 1, ns, MSE ⫽ 1.06,
partial ␩2 ⫽ .02. None of the main effects were significant (all ps
⬎.15, all partial ␩2s ⬍.05). Tests of simple effects suggest that the
agency interaction comes from observers rating the rebel more
agentic than the compliant other, t(45) ⫽ 2.24, p ⫽ .03, whereas
actors did not, t(45) ⫽ 0.61, p ⫽ .55, and that the marginal
interaction on communion comes from observers perceiving the
rebel as nicer than the compliant other, t(45) ⫽ 2.27, p ⫽ .03,
whereas actors did not, t(45) ⫽ 0.38, ns.

Discussion
Study 2 replicates the cross-over pattern observed in Study 1:
Whether participants liked someone taking a stand against a racist
situation more than a compliant target depended on participants’
own involvement in the task (supporting Hypothesis 1). Actors
who had already gone along with the racist task liked the rebel less
than an obedient other (marginally supporting Prediction 1a),
whereas observers who had not participated in the task yet seemed
to prefer the rebel, but this difference was not significant here
(Prediction 1b was not supported).
In Study 2, the significant interaction on the attraction variable
therefore seems to be driven by actors liking and respecting the
rebel (marginally) less, whereas in Study 1, not only did actors like
the rebel less than the compliant other, but observers also liked the

rebel significantly more. It is of interest that, although observers in
Study 2 did not report liking and respecting the rebel any more,
they did rate him or her significantly higher on the agency and the
communion composites, driving a significant interaction in both
cases. They also thought that the rebel was more moral than an
obedient other. Because the placement of the trait ratings and the
measures of attraction were reversed in Study 2, it is possible that
for observers to start appreciating rebels, they need to reflect on the
implication of their behavior, as they do when they rate their
personality. Seeing the attraction measures first in Study 2, they
did not report attraction for the rebel, though they did attribute
more positive qualities to him or her once they got to the trait
rating task.
One issue that was not addressed in Study 2 was the identity of
the target. In particular, participants were not provided any information about the target’s gender and ethnicity, and this could have
led participants to make different assumptions on the basis of their
condition. These demographic assumptions might mediate the
effect. If, for example, participants assumed that the rebel standing
against racism was African American, then it would give a different meaning to their act and change the nature of the threat for
non-African American respondents. The fact that our finding is an
interaction (i.e., that the rebel is sometimes liked more, and sometimes liked less) reduces this concern, but in the next studies, we
made sure to clearly identify the speaker’s gender and ethnicity in
order to eliminate this issue altogether. In Study 3, we specified
that the target was a man, and we used only male participants, and
in Study 4, we used men and women but always matched gender
of target with that of the participant.
Having demonstrated the moderating role of involvement on
reactions to moral rebels in two studies, in the final two studies we
endeavored to demonstrate the psychological processes involved
in bringing about resentment. Accordingly, Study 3 is a mediation
study in which we predict that the rejection of moral rebels can be
explained by the fear of being rejected by them (Hypothesis 2),
whereas Study 4 is a moderation study that demonstrates the role
of self-threat (Hypothesis 3).

Study 3: The Mediating Role of Imagined Rejection
The goal of Study 3 was to show that the rejection of moral
rebels is a reaction to people’s perception that the rebels would
reject them, presumably because they see them as less moral
(Hypothesis 2). Though such judgment can be aversive in other
domains, the particular sting of moral reproach (Sabini & Silver,
1982), as well as the centrality of morality in many people’s
self-concept (Park et al., 2007), makes fear of implicit moral
reproach a likely trigger of resentment. To test whether the sting of
moral rebels could be explained by the fear of disapproval, we
tested the mediating role of imagined liking and respect in the
effects described so far. We predicted that actors would expect to
be rejected by rebels (Prediction 2a) and that resentment results
from this rejection threat, and therefore that fear of rejection would
mediate the rejection of moral rebels by actors (Prediction 2b).
Instead of asking participants directly about imagined moral
reproach, which might be difficult for participants to articulate, or
even self-threat, which we assumed participants would be reluctant
to admit if probed head-on, we tapped into imagined rejection by
turning around the liking and respect questions used in Studies 1

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

THE REJECTION OF MORAL REBELS

and 2 and asking participants who had gone along with the task
(actors) how they thought they would be seen by the person whose
completed the questionnaire they rated.
To assess other possible factors leading to the rejection of moral
rebels, we also asked participants who had done the task first
(actors) to answer several other ancillary questions. First, we asked
participants how satisfied they were with their choice right after
making it, and then again after seeing the other’s choice. Second,
we included several items that addressed how much rebels invalidated excuses by reducing the perceived pull of situational demands.
Finally, to make sure that the effect observed in Studies 1 and 2
did not result from gender stereotypes (e.g., if the rebel is more
likely to be seen as a man), or cross-gender perception (e.g., if men
and women are differentially attracted by an agentic male), in
Study 3, we used only male participants and always specified that
the target other was a man as well.

Method
Participants
One hundred thirty-two male undergraduates at a large U.S.
private university (60 Whites, 53 Asians, 8 non-Black multiracial,
7 Hispanics, 1 Native American, and 3 unreported) were recruited
by a White female or an Hispanic male experimenter to fill out a
survey at various campus locations.

83

same agreement scale as above to rate the following statements: “I
am very happy with my choice of a suspect” (a second time), “My
choice is representative of my attitudes and values,” “Anyone
would have picked the same suspect as I did,” “The information
presented was sufficient to lead me to the correct choice,” and “I
had no other choice but to select the most obvious suspect.”
Finally, they answered all three liking questions again, as well as
the respect question, but from the point of view of the other
participant (e.g., “After seeing your answers on the police decision
making task, how much would the other participant like you as a
friend?”), using the same 11-point scales used to rate the other.

Results
Excluded Participants
Only 2 participants (out of 132) expressed suspicion. They were
excluded from the rest of our analyses. Thirteen actors picked one
of the White targets as the likely suspect. Because our hypothesis
was predicated on the fact that actors have engaged in the problematic behavior, we did not predict resentment for individuals
having in some way already taken a stand. For that reason, we
excluded from subsequent analyses these 13 actors, leaving 117
valid participants, but as in previous studies, we repeated the main
analyses with all 132 initial participants, and none of the patterns
or significance levels changed with all participants included.

Attraction
Procedure
The design and procedure for Study 3 was the same as Study 2,
except for four main changes. First, to save time and reduce
suspicion, participants in the observer condition were not asked to
fill out the police decision task themselves. These responses were
of little use to the analysis in Study 2, and the repetition of the
questionnaire raised suspicion in participants who assumed that we
were trying to influence their own response by showing them
someone else’s first. Second, we added a brief demographic survey
at the top of the police decision task response sheet, enabling us to
inform participants that the person who allegedly completed the
form was a White male. Third, as mentioned above, we used only
male participants. Fourth, and most important, participants in the
actor condition completed an extra sheet of process questions after
they had rated the other participant.

Materials
The materials used in Study 3 were the same as in Study 2,
except for a few changes. As mentioned above, we added basic
demographics (gender, race, and age) at the top of the police
decision task—the target was now identified as male, White, and
age 19. In the liking questions, we substituted the roommate
question used in Studies 1 and 2 with the question “How much
would you like to have a conversation with the other participant?”
To shorten the procedure, we also removed all trait ratings, though
we left the open-ended question. We added at the bottom of this
first sheet the statement “I am very happy with my choice of a
suspect,” followed by a 7-point scale ranging from ⫺3 (strongly
disagree) to ⫹3 (strongly agree). Actors received an additional
sheet after seeing the choice of the other, where first they used the

As in previous studies, we computed an aggregate variable of
attraction by averaging the three liking variables and the respect
variable (Cronbach’s ␣ ⫽ .86), with low values indicating more
rejection. We conducted the Role ⫻ Rebellion ANOVA on this
aggregate variable and found a marginal main effect of role, F(1,
113) ⫽ 3.24, p ⫽ .08, MSE ⫽ 3.12, qualified by the predicted
significant two-way interaction, F(1, 113) ⫽ 5.58, p ⫽ .02, partial
␩2 ⫽ .05. Overall, actors preferred obedient others (M ⫽ 1.63,
SD ⫽ 1.15) to rebels (M ⫽ 0.53, SD ⫽ 2.27), t(113) ⫽ 2.33, p ⫽
.02, d ⫽ 0.61, whereas observers showed little preference (M ⫽
0.27, SD ⫽ 1.47 vs. M ⫽ 0.71, SD ⫽ 1.923), t(113) ⫽ .98, ns, d ⫽
⫺0.27.

Imagined Attraction
We next turn our attention to the imagined attraction measures
collected for actors (2 actors left these blank and are not included
in these analyses, leaving 54 valid). We created an aggregate score
of imagined attraction by averaging the three scores of imagined
liking and imagined respect by the other, all ranging from ⫺3 to
⫹3 (Cronbach’s ␣ ⫽ .88), with low scores indicating more imagined rejection. As predicted (Prediction 2a), actors expected to be
rejected by a rebel (M ⫽ ⫺0.88, SD ⫽ 1.94), but not by an
obedient other (M ⫽ 1.5, SD ⫽ 1.13), t(52) ⫽ 5.33, p ⬍ .001.

Mediation Analyses
We tested whether imagined attraction mediated the impact of
rebellion on attraction for actors (rebellion in the subsequent
regression analyses is coded such that 0 is obedient and 1 is rebel),
as illustrated in Figure 2. Actors rejected rebels more than obedient

84

MONIN, SAWYER, AND MARQUEZ

Next, we computed a score of situation blame by averaging the
three choice items (“Anyone would have picked the same suspect
as I did,” “The information presented was sufficient to lead me to
the correct choice,” and “I had no other choice but to select the
most obvious suspect”) into an aggregate that could range from ⫺3
to ⫹3 (Cronbach’s ␣ ⫽ .61). Actors who had seen someone rebel
were slightly less likely to blame the situation for their own choice
(M ⫽ 0.24, SD ⫽ 1.22) than if they had seen someone obey (M ⫽
0.76, SD ⫽ 1.29), but this difference was not significant, t(52) ⫽
1.52, p ⫽ .14, d ⫽ 0.42.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Discussion

Figure 2. Mediation analyses for actors in Study 3. Coefficients in
parentheses correspond to the initial effect to be explained. The top panel
shows that imagined attraction mediates the effect of rebellion on attraction; the bottom panel tests the reverse causal path and shows that attraction does not mediate the impact of rebellion on imagined attraction. *p ⬍
.05. **p ⬍ .01.

others (␤ ⫽ ⫺.28), t(52) ⫽ ⫺2.12, p ⫽ .04, and thought that rebels
would reject them more than would obedient others (␤ ⫽ ⫺.59),
t(52) ⫽ ⫺5.33, p ⬍ .001. When we used both the rebellion
manipulation and imagined attraction to predict attraction, imagined attraction was a significant predictor (␤ ⫽ .80), t(51) ⫽ 6.50,
p ⬍ .001, whereas the rebellion manipulation was no longer
significant (␤ ⫽ .20), t(51) ⫽ 1.58, ns, and this reduction was
significant in a Sobel test (z ⫽ 4.12, p ⬍ .001).
Furthermore, to make sure that imagined attraction was not
actually a consequence of attraction (especially because it was
measured later), we also tested an alternative mediational model in
which attraction mediated the relationship between rebellion and
imagined attraction (see Figure 2, bottom panel). We already knew
that rebellion significantly affected both imagined attraction and
attraction (see above). We added a regression predicting imagined
attraction with rebellion and attraction and found that attraction
was indeed a significant predictor (␤ ⫽ .56), t(51) ⫽ 6.50, p ⬍
.001, but also that the rebellion manipulation was still a highly
significant predictor (␤ ⫽ ⫺.44), t(51) ⫽ ⫺5.01, p ⬍ .001. This
analysis supports our confidence that imagined attraction is the
mediator of attraction, and not the other way around.

Happiness With Choice and Situation Blame
Actors did not express less happiness with their own choice after
seeing a rebel (M ⫽ 0.53, SD ⫽ 1.43) than after seeing an obedient
other (M ⫽ 0.67, SD ⫽ 1.40), t(52) ⫽ 0.34, ns, even when looked
at as a difference from the measure taken just after their choice,
t(52) ⫽ 0.37, ns.

As in Studies 1 and 2, Hypothesis 1 was supported in Study 3:
Reactions to moral rebels depended on participants’ own involvement in the task. Actors who had gone along with the task liked a
rebel less than a compliant other (supporting Prediction 1a),
whereas mere observers did not show this preference (Prediction
1b was, as in Study 2, not supported). By tapping into imagined
rejection, Study 3 enabled us to go beyond demonstrating the
rejection of moral rebels to start looking at the causes leading up
to it. The mediation analyses suggest that the rejection of rebels by
actors can be explained as a reaction to the sense that one would
be rejected by the person taking the moral high ground, as demonstrated by the facts that actors did expect to be liked less by the
rebel (Prediction 2a), and that the effect of rebellion on rejection
was mediated by imagined rejection (Prediction 2b). Furthermore,
a test of the alternative model suggests that the reverse is not true:
It is unlikely that imagined rejection is the result of rejection, as the
impact of rebellion on imagined rejection is still highly significant
when rejection is included in the analysis.
Imagined rejection thus seems to be an important factor in the
rejection of rebels. We found little support, however, for the idea
that rebels make individuals less happy with their own decision or
that rebels make individuals more aware that they could have gone
beyond the pressures of the situation, although it is possible that
these variables are less accessible for self-report, less willingly
revealed, or were measured too late in the procedure. Going back
to the imagined rejection mediator, it is striking that, as we pointed
out earlier, participants had no reason to believe that they would
ever meet the rebel or, for that matter, that the rebel would ever see
their response and thus get a chance to reject them. Thus, the
mediating cognition is not what the rebel will think, but what the
rebel would have thought were he still around. The fact that the
actual presence of the rejecting rebel is not necessary to yield
rejection suggests that imagined rejection may be less a threat to an
actual social relationship than a threat to one’s personal sense of
integrity and self-worth. We propose that the thought that someone
would reject you constitutes a threat to one’s “moral and adaptive
adequacy” (Steele, 1988)—and that this threat triggers rejection.
Study 4 tests this piece of the model.

Study 4: Buttressing the Self
Study 3 suggests that moral rebels are resented by actors because of the perception that they would, if they could, reject others
who do not take a similar position. This fits our model, which
posits that the imagined rejection perceived in moral rebels is a
threat to one’s sense of adequacy (Hypothesis 3). As we have

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

THE REJECTION OF MORAL REBELS

noted, the moral rebel in our studies is actually not in a position to
judge participants, but we argue that the simple fact that someone
could look down on them can shake participants’ self-confidence,
and it is this sting that triggers the rejection. Having shown the role
of imagined reproach in Study 3, in Study 4 we proceeded to show
the implication of the self. Specifically, we reasoned that if the
rejection of moral rebels indeed results from shaking participants’
self-confidence, then actors should not feel a need to reject rebels
if they have been secured in their sense of being a good, effective
person (Prediction 3a).
Spencer et al. (2001) showed that after receiving bogus negative
feedback on an intelligence test, participants chose to listen to a
poorly performing peer in preparation for a later interview. However, when participants had had the chance to write about an
important value, they preferred to listen to a highly performing
peer. Apparently, this opportunity to self-affirm made an impressive peer more palatable, despite the recent setback of the intelligence test. Along similar lines, and in line with self-affirmation
theory (Sherman & Cohen, 2006; Steele, 1988), we predicted that
buttressing participants’ sense of adequacy by giving them a
chance to reflect on one of their important values or qualities
would shield them from the sting of imagined rejection and would
therefore reduce the need to put down moral rebels (Prediction 3a).
In essence, we predicted that self-affirmed actors in Study 4
would resemble uninvolved observers in Studies 1–3. Prior research suggests that self-affirmation can reduce the tendency to
deny or skew information that is threatening to one’s beliefs, and
thus reduce the impact of one’s initial point of view on the
processing of new information (e.g., Cohen, Aronson, &
Steele,2000). We predicted that self-affirmation would similarly
give actors some distance, both reducing their need to reject the
rebel (Prediction 3a, above) and allowing them to recognize the
value of the rebel’s behavior as a moral, agentic choice—possibly
to the point of questioning their own (Prediction 3b).
A secondary goal of Study 4 was to determine whether the
rejection of a moral rebel serves to reduce the kind of negative
affect or psychological discomfort assumed to accompany cognitive dissonance (Festinger, 1957). We thus added measures of
self-reported affect and discomfort, varying whether they were
presented before or after the opportunity to put down the rebel. The
placement of these measures could be important, because if a
process serves to reduce discomfort, then discomfort should be
high when measured before it but lower when measured after (cf.
Elliot & Devine, 1994).

Method
Participants
Seventy-nine undergraduates at a large U.S. private university
(47 Whites, 17 Asians, 9 Hispanics, 3 Native Americans, 2 nonBlack multiracial, and 1 Iranian; 52 men, 27 women) came to the
laboratory to complete the research participation requirement of an
introductory psychology class or in exchange of a payment of $8.
The experimenter was a White man.

Design
Participants were randomly assigned to one of three conditions:
obedient, rebel control, or rebel self-affirmation. All participants in

85

this study were actors (i.e., completed the police decision task first)
and saw a compliant other in the first condition, or a rebel other in
the other two. Before rating the other, participants wrote a personal
essay in the self-affirmation condition or listed foods in the rebel
control and obedient conditions. We also included two different
orders within the rebel control condition to look at a possible order
effect on affect measures (cf. Elliot & Devine, 1994), but we
collapsed these two conditions into one for simplicity after discovering that this order made no difference (see the Placement of
affect measures section).

Procedure
Participants came to the laboratory to take part in a decisionmaking study and were told that they would make decisions, form
impressions of other students, and fill out some mood and emotion
questionnaires. They first completed the police decision task from
Study 3. The experimenter, sitting with his back toward participants for the duration of the study, then came by with a clipboard
and ostensibly made a note of the participant’s choice in the task.
After this, participants wrote a personal essay or listed foods they
had eaten (see below). After 8 min, the experimenter told participants that they would switch to forming impressions of a past
participant and gave them a blank rating sheet and a completed
version of the police decision task (containing the rebel vs. obedient manipulation) ostensibly taken randomly from a stack of
completed questionnaires. The other participant was always White,
age 19, and matched in gender with the participants. Participants’
own completed decision task was left on the table, face up, next to
the one allegedly completed by the other student—and it was left
there until the end of the study to make sure it remained salient to
participants. After indicating their impression of the other participant, participants rated their affective state on a list of traits (half
the participants in the rebel control condition did this first) and
answered the questions about the situation and about expected
rejection introduced in Study 3.

Self-Affirmation Manipulation
In the rebel self-affirmation condition, participants read the
following instructions:
Please write about a recent experience in which you demonstrated a
quality or value that is very important to you and which made you feel
good about yourself. Examples of “personally important values or
quality” might include (but are not limited to) artistic skills, sense of
humor, social skills, spontaneity, athletic ability, musical talent, physical attractiveness, creativity, business skills, or romantic values.

Participants named their chosen quality or value, rated its personal
importance on a scale from 0 (not important at all) to 4 (extremely
important), then described their experience on the blank lines
provided on the rest of the page in the remaining 8 min. Participants in the obedient or rebel control conditions instead read the
following instructions: “Please describe everything you have eaten
or drunk in the past 48 hours. Do not worry about things you find

MONIN, SAWYER, AND MARQUEZ

86

Table 1
Condition Means, Standard Deviations, and Omnibus F Tests for the Main Variables in Study 4

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Obedient

Rebel selfaffirmation

Rebel control

Variable

M

SD

Attraction
Morality
Communion
Agency
Imagined attraction
Happiness with choice
Situation blame
n

1.88a
1.11a
0.83a
1.34a
1.00a
1.32a
1.42a

1.38
1.66
0.89
0.87
2.03
1.67
1.19

M

SD

0.02b
1.41a
0.25b
1.44a
⫺1.52b
1.24a
1.03a

19

2.38
1.30
0.98
1.09
1.38
1.41
1.36

M
2.54a
2.42b
0.87a
2.10b
⫺0.58b
0.26b
⫺0.07b

29

Omnibus test
SD

F(2, 64)

MSE

1.95
1.02
0.62
1.02
2.00
1.66
1.62

10.17**
5.12**
3.99*
3.31*
11.68**
2.87†
5.98**

4.08
1.80
0.74
1.02
3.12
2.42
1.94

19

Note. Means that do not share the same subscript differ at p ⬍ .05, using t tests with 64 degrees of freedom.
*
p ⬍ .05. ** p ⬍ .01. † p ⬍ .10.

yourself unable to remember,” followed by blank lines on the rest
of the page.3

Measures
Ratings were similar to previous studies, with some small
changes. Participants indicated how much they would like to work
on a project with the other participant and how much they would
like him or her as a friend, both on an 11-point scale ranging from
⫺5 (dislike very much) to ⫹ 5 (like very much), with an unlabeled
midpoint of 0. They indicated how much they respected the other
participant on a similar 11-point scale ranging from ⫺5 (despise a
great deal) to ⫹5 (respect a great deal), then indicated the
personality trait that they thought best described the other participant (open ended), and finally rated the other participant on the 14
semantic differentials on 7-point scales with a midpoint of 0
(neither) and with the following poles: stupid–intelligent, strong–
weak, unpleasant–pleasant, funny–not funny, confident–insecure,
immature–mature, active–passive, cruel– kind, nice–awful, cold–
warm, honest– dishonest, unfair–fair, moral–immoral, and
dependent–independent.
On the following page, participants rated their own morality
relative to other students on campus on a scale ranging from 0%
(you are the least moral student on campus) to 100% (you are the
most moral student on campus) and a midpoint of 50% (average).
Then, under the heading “mood and emotion survey,” they answered the question “How do you feel right now?” by rating each
of the following 24 states on a scale ranging from 1 (does not apply
at all) to 7 (applies very much): disappointed with myself, good,
uncomfortable, happy with myself, determined, annoyed with myself, happy, guilty, comfortable with myself, peaceful, uneasy,
disgusted with myself, excited, pleased with myself, energetic,
angry with myself, bothered, friendly, dissatisfied with myself,
fatigued, self-critical, optimistic, secure with myself, and lonely.
Finally, participants rated his or her agreement with the following items introduced in Study 3 on a 7-point scale ranging from ⫺3
(strongly disagree) to ⫹3 (strongly agree): “I am very happy with
my choice of a suspect”; “My choice is representative of my
attitudes and values”; “Anyone would have picked the same suspect as I did”; “The information presented was sufficient to lead
me to the correct choice”; and “I had no other choice but to select

the most obvious subject.” On the same page, they indicated how
the other participant would like and respect them after seeing their
own answers on the police decision making task, using the first
three scales used to rate the other participant.

Results
Table 1 displays means and standard deviations of the main
variables, analyzed below, as well as one-way ANOVAs, mean
square errors, and pairwise comparisons between means.

Preliminary Analyses
Suspicion. Eleven participants expressed suspicion during debriefing and were excluded from the following analyses. Only 1
participant was excluded for not picking the African American
suspect (Steven) in the police decision task, leaving 67 valid
participants (44 men, 23 women). As before, we repeated the main
analyses with all 79 participants included, but patterns and significance levels were the same with all participants included.
Placement of affect measures. The placement of affect measures in the rebel control condition did not have a significant
impact on any of the variables analyzed below. In particular, order
did not significantly affect the attraction composite, t(63) ⫽ 0.48,
ns. For ease of presentation, we collapsed the two orders into the
rebel control condition in subsequent analyses and only mention
order again when it is most relevant, that is, in the analysis of
affect measures.
Self-affirmation manipulation checks. Participants in the rebel
self-affirmation condition confirmed that their chosen value was
very important (M ⫽ 3.42, SD ⫽ 0.61) on a 5-point scale ranging
from 0 (not important at all) to 4 (extremely important). The
values chosen varied from physical (fitness, athletic ability [4
times]) and other skills (performances as a poet, artistic skillscreativity, business skills, social skills) to desirable personality
3

This manipulation was adapted from Cohen et al. (2000, Study 1), who
noted that they “chose this control condition (instead of one that asked
participants to write about an unimportant value) because students tend to
turn almost any self-reflective task into a self-affirming one” (p. 1154).

THE REJECTION OF MORAL REBELS

traits (patience, spontaneity, romantic values, keeping contact with
friends and family), with only a minority of morality-related traits
(loyalty [twice], honesty, generosity, ability to help others, and
concern/care for someone in need). We counted the number of
words used by participants and found that participants did not use
significantly more words in the rebel self-affirmation condition
(M ⫽ 115, SD ⫽ 39) than in the rebel control condition (M ⫽ 110,
SD ⫽ 51), t(64) ⫽ 0.69, ns. By this rough metric at least, we had
no reason to believe that participants in the self-affirmation condition expended more effort than participants in the rebel control
condition.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Perception of the Other
Attraction (Table 1). The three groups differed significantly
on an attraction composite of liking to work on a project, liking as
a friend, and respect (␣ ⫽ .88). Replicating previous studies,
nonaffirmed actors liked the rebel significantly less (M ⫽ .02) than
the obedient other (M ⫽ 1.88; see Figure 3). More important,
self-affirmed participants showed no such rejection of the rebel
(M ⫽ 2.54).4
Morality (Table 1). Nonaffirmed actors did not rate a rebel
significantly more moral (M ⫽ 1.41) than an obedient target (M ⫽
1.11), but self-affirmed participants did (M ⫽ 2.42).
Agency and communion (Table 1). The scree plot in a principal axis factor analysis with a Promax rotation on the 14 bipolar
trait items suggested two factors, together accounting for 45% of
the variance. A criterion loading of .40 excluded “funny” (both
loadings below .16) but otherwise yielded a nonoverlapping solution: communion (␣ ⫽ .84) comprising nice, kind, pleasant, warm,
fair, and mature; and agency (␣ ⫽ .82, correlated .46 with communion, p ⬍ .001) comprising strong, independent, intelligent,
honest, secure, moral, and active. As is apparent in Table 1,
communion was significantly lower in the rebel control condition
(M ⫽ 0.25) than in both the obedient (M ⫽ 0.83) and the rebel
self-affirmation condition (M ⫽ 0.87). In contrast, agency was
significantly higher in the rebel self-affirmation condition (M ⫽

87

2.10) than in both the compliant (M ⫽ 1.34) and the rebel control
condition (M ⫽ 1.44).

Imagined Attraction
Mediation of rebel rejection. We created a composite for
imagined attraction by averaging the three questions asking the
participant to imagine how much the other person would like and
respect him or her (␣ ⫽ .87) and tested first whether it mediated
the difference between the obedient and the rebel control conditions. Using a dummy code pitting the rebel control condition (1)
against the obedient condition (0), rebels were expected to like
participant less (␤ ⫽ ⫺.60), t(46) ⫽ ⫺5.12, p ⬍ .001; and when
both rebellion and imagined attraction were entered to predict
attraction, imagined attraction was a significant predictor (␤ ⫽
.38), t(45) ⫽ 2.16, p ⫽ .04, whereas the rebellion manipulation,
which had been a significant predictor on its own (␤ ⫽ ⫺.41),
t(46) ⫽ ⫺3.07, p ⫽ .004, was no longer so with the mediator
included (␤ ⫽ ⫺.20), t(45) ⫽ ⫺1.24, p ⫽ .22, Sobel z ⫽ ⫺2.00,
p ⬍ .05. As in Study 3, the reverse causal order was not supported
because rebellion still predicted imagined attraction when attraction was controlled for (␤ ⫽ ⫺.49), t(45) ⫽ ⫺3.96, p ⬍ .001.
Self-affirmation and imagined attraction. Participants in the
rebel self-affirmation condition expected a lukewarm reaction
from the other participant (M ⫽ ⫺0.58), definitely cooler than in
the obedient condition (M ⫽ 1.00), t(64) ⫽ 2.76, p ⫽ .01, and only
marginally warmer than in the rebel control condition (M ⫽
⫺1.52), t(64) ⫽ 1.80, p ⫽ .08. Does this marginal boost in
imagined attraction explain why self-affirmed participants did not
reject a rebel? To test this, we conducted a mediation analysis
using a dummy code pitting the rebel control condition (0) against
the rebel self-affirmation condition (1). As above, affirmation
marginally increased imagined attraction (␤ ⫽ .27), t(46) ⫽ 1.93,
p ⫽ .06, and when both variables were entered in the equation,
imagined attraction was significant (␤ ⫽ .36), t(45) ⫽ 2.95, p ⫽
.005, but self-affirmation was still a highly significant predictor
(␤ ⫽ .39), t(45) ⫽ 3.19, p ⫽ .003, and not significantly reduced by
the inclusion of imagined attraction (Sobel z ⫽ 1.61, p ⫽ .11).
Thus, the more clement view of rebels by self-affirmed participants does not seem to result from expecting to be liked better.

Affect
Identifying factors. A principal axis factor analysis with a
Promax rotation on the 24 affect items suggested three factors
(scree plot method) capturing 56% of the variance. A loading
cutpoint of .45 excluded “friendly” (loadings ⬍ .42) and “uncomfortable” (loadings ⬍ .34), but otherwise yielded nonoverlapping
factors: negative affect (␣ ⫽ .90), which comprised disgusted with
myself, angry with myself, dissatisfied with myself, disappointed
Note that participants who self-affirmed with a moral value (n ⫽ 6)
were less positive about the rebel (M ⫽ 1.61, SD ⫽ 2.02) than participants
who self-affirmed with a nonmoral value (n ⫽ 13; M ⫽ 2.97, SD ⫽ 1.83,
d ⫽ 0.76), though this difference was not significant with so few participants, t(17) ⫽ 1.46, p ⫽ .16. This trend is consistent with previous research
suggesting that self-affirmation using the domain that will later be challenged is less effective because it highlights inconsistency (Aronson,
Blanton, & Cooper, 1995).
4

Figure 3. Attraction means (⫾1 SE) per condition in Study 4. Whereas a
rebel other is still liked less than an obedient other in the first two
conditions, self-affirmation increases liking for the rebel in the third
condition.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

88

MONIN, SAWYER, AND MARQUEZ

with myself, annoyed with myself, fatigued, guilty, bothered,
lonely, and self-critical; positive affect— high arousal (␣ ⫽ .89),
r(65) ⫽ ⫺.41, p ⫽ .001, with negative affect, comprising energetic, excited, happy, pleased with myself, determined, good,
happy with myself, and optimistic; and positive affect—low
arousal (␣ ⫽ .82), r(65) ⫽ ⫺.65, with negative affect; and,
r(65) ⫽ .59, with positive affect— high arousal (both p ⬍ .001),
comprising secure with myself, peaceful, comfortable with myself,
and uneasy (reversed scored).
No mean differences between groups. As mentioned in the
preliminary analyses, the placement of these measures in the rebel
control condition did not affect any of these measures significantly, all three ts(63) ⬍ .5, ps ⬎ .6. After collapsing these two
orders into the rebel control condition, we did not find any significant difference between the three groups either, all three Fs(2,
64) ⬍ 2.0, ps ⬎ .15. In particular, the rebel self-affirmation
condition did not generate more positive affect than other conditions, ruling out the possibility that it was merely a mood manipulation (Sherman & Cohen, 2006). Given the high correlations
between measures, we created an overall affect composite averaging all 24 affect items after reversing the positive items (␣ ⫽ .94),
but again we observed no significant difference between group
means, F(2, 64) ⫽ 1.63, p ⫽ .20, or between orders within the
rebel control condition, t(63) ⬍ .2, ns.
How does it feel to reject the other? To test whether different
feelings might be associated with attraction in the three conditions,
we conducted a regression predicting attraction with the overall
affect composite (standardized), two dummy codes capturing the
rebel control and the rebel self-affirmation condition, and two
product terms of the dummy codes and the standardized affect
composite. Reflecting that rebels are liked less than obedient
others, the dummy code for the rebel control condition was a
significant predictor, t(61) ⫽ ⫺2.93, p ⫽ .005. More germane to
the matter at hand, the product between this dummy code and the
affect composite was also a significant predictor, t(61) ⫽ 2.80, p ⫽
.007 (all other ts ⬍ 1.3, ns): Whereas rejecting an obedient other
was associated with negative affect, r(17) ⫽ ⫺.45, p ⫽ .05,
rejecting a rebel was associated with positive affect, r(27) ⫽ .415,
p ⫽ .03. For self-affirmed participants, his or her reaction to the
rebel seems detached from affect, r(17) ⫽ .04, ns, though the fact
that the corresponding interaction term was not significant in the
regression makes unclear whether this apparent departure from the
obedient condition is reliable.

Secondary Measures
Ratings of one’s moral standing. When asked for an estimate
of their morality percentile, participants reported on average that
they were more moral than two thirds of their peers (M ⫽ 67%,
SD ⫽ 15%), but this did not vary by condition, F(2, 64) ⬍ 1, ns.
Happiness with choice (Table 1). As in Study 3, participants
did not report less happiness with their choice of suspect in the
rebel control condition (M ⫽ 1.24) than in the obedient condition
(M ⫽ 1.32), but in line with their tendency to face the music,
self-affirmed participants did (M ⫽ 0.26).
Situational blame (Table 1). Similarly, the tendency to blame
the situation (computed by averaging “I had no other choice but to
select the most obvious suspect”; “Anyone would have picked the
same suspect as I did”; and “The information presented was

sufficient to lead me to the correct choice” [␣ ⫽ 69]) was significantly lower in the rebel self-affirmation condition (M ⫽ ⫺0.07)
than in the rebel control condition (M ⫽ 1.03), itself similar to the
obedient condition (M ⫽ 1.42).

Discussion
Study 4 was designed to demonstrate that the rejection of moral
rebels is a reaction to a threat to the self. Whereas we once more
observed rebel rejection among actors (supporting Prediction 1a)
in the two cells in which judging the other was preceded by a
mundane task (listing what one had eaten for 48 hr prior to the
study), rebels were no longer rejected if participants first had a
chance to feel secured in their sense of moral and adaptive adequacy by recalling a recent experience when they demonstrated an
important quality or value (supporting Prediction 3a). Selfaffirmed actors liked and respected a moral rebel as much as actors
liked and respected a compliant other, looking very much like
uninvolved observers in Studies 1–3 who were not threatened by
the rebel’s stance.
The fact that secure participants did not feel a need to put down
moral rebels suggests that when actors do put down moral rebels,
it results from a threat to one’s sense of self-worth and integrity.
As in Study 3, we found that the rejection of moral rebels was
mediated by imagined rejection (supporting Hypothesis 2); selfaffirmed participants expected marginally less rejection, but that
did not explain the difference. They knew that rebels would
probably not hold them in high regard, yet they did not seem to
care—they still did not mind them. In fact, they were the only
group for whom attraction/rejection was not related to how they
were feeling.
Self-affirmed participants’ ability to take stock of the rebel’s
stance without lashing back or denying its value went beyond
merely not minding rebels despite imagined rejection. In support
of Prediction 3b, self-affirmed participants seemed better able to
give credit when credit was due: In contrast to participants in the
rebel control condition, they saw the rebel as particularly moral
and agentic, reported being less happy with their choice than
participants seeing an obedient other, and even saw that they might
not have been as constrained by the situation as they thought at the
time.
Does this clemency and clear-sightedness in the self-affirmation
condition result from mere distraction? Did it make participants
lose sight of the rebel they were rating, did it make them forget
about their own choice, or did it engage them more than the control
condition? Our data provide little support for either of these three
possibilities. First, the essay was always written before participants
saw both the completed questionnaire and the ratings sheet, so it
would not have the ability to distract them from the completed
questionnaire that they based their ratings on. Second, after recording their choice, we intentionally always left the completed
sheet on the table facing the participants, so while doing the ratings
they had three sheets in front of them: their completed questionnaire and the target’s side by side, and the blank rating sheet. So
5
Note that the placement of the affect measures did not matter: r(15) ⫽
.39 when they were placed before the attraction measures, and r(10) ⫽ .47
when they were placed after.

THE REJECTION OF MORAL REBELS

it is unlikely they forgot about either their choice or that of the
rebel. Third, we made sure that the writing time was the same in
all three conditions, so our best available index of engagement was
to count the number of words used in the various conditions—and
as reported above, participants in the rebel self-affirmation condition did not write significantly more words than participants in the
food-listing condition. For these three reasons, it is unlikely that
the increased attraction for rebels in the personal essay condition
results from distraction. Instead, we believe that the boost in
self-confidence resulting from contemplating an important feature
of their identity was what enabled participants in the personal
essay condition to weather the threat of the moral rebel.

89

(Study 1). We observed the strongest observer effect (Prediction
1b) in Study 1, when observers were not even in the laboratory but
were approached 1 month later outside of the experimental situation. Note that Rawls’ veil of ignorance goes beyond not knowing
one’s position in the social structure: “Nor, again, does anyone
know his conception of the good” (p. 118). In light of our studies,
one sees the wisdom of this recommendation; indeed, stepping foot
in the situation as an unquestioning actor seems to change one’s
very “conception of the good,” whereas an observer behind the veil
of ignorance sees a brave moral exemplar, an actor down in the
trenches sees a self-righteous pest.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Summary of Hypothesis Testing
General Discussion
In four studies, we investigated why those doing the right thing
are not always embraced by others, and we showed that reactions
to moral rebels largely depend on whether their principled stance
is perceived as an implicit rejection of those who went along with
the problematic situation. When fictitious rebels refused to write a
deceitful speech or to collaborate in a racist decision task, they
were liked more than (Study 1) or as much as (Studies 2 and 3)
obedient others by uninvolved observers but less than obedient
others by participants who had already gone along with the morally problematic behavior (Studies 1– 4).
Study 1 showed this phenomenon using a modified induced
compliance paradigm, in which low-choice participants who had
written a counterattitudinal speech disliked a peer refusing to write
the speech, although observers liked the rebel more than an obedient participant. In Study 2, rebels who refused to make a choice
in a whodunit task in which the obvious suspect was African
American were disliked by participants already implicated in the
task, but not by observers, who called the rebel more moral. In
both studies, the exact same behavior was judged quite differently
depending on the perceiver’s own involvement.
Going beyond these initial two demonstration studies, the last
two studies cast light on the roots of this resentment. Study 3
demonstrated that resentment is a defensive reaction to the perception that rebels are implicitly rejecting those who do not question the situation: Indeed, the rejection of rebels was mediated by
the belief that the rebel would reject others who did not rebel.
Finally, in Study 4, we showed that this defensive reaction results
from a threat to one’s self-confidence: When participants were
self-affirmed prior to seeing the rebel, they claimed to like and
respect the rebel as much as nonaffirmed actors liked a compliant
target—and declared that the rebel was especially moral. Together,
these studies consistently demonstrate that rebels can elicit resentment and rejection in individuals who failed to take such a principled stance and who experience the rebellion as a personal
rejection.
In his Theory of Justice, philosopher John Rawls (1999) famously posited that a fair procedure to generate just principles is
to elevate individuals above “specific contingencies that put men
at odds” and to assume that they are behind a “veil of ignorance”
as to their position in society (p. 118). Our observer participants
were in many ways in Rawls’ ideal position, by not knowing how
they would have acted in this situation. Not being involved, they
were able to appreciate the morality and strength of character of
the rebel (Study 2), and even to like and respect him or her more

How did the data specifically support our hypotheses, as spelled
out in the introduction? Hypothesis 1, the interaction pattern, was
supported in every study in which it could be tested (Studies 1, 2,
and 3). Prediction 1a, that actors would dislike the rebel compared
with a compliant other, was supported in nearly every study
(significant in Studies 1, 3, and, 4; marginal in Study 2). Prediction
1b, that observers would prefer a compliant other to the rebel, was
supported in Study 1 but not in Studies 2 and 3 (and could not be
tested in Study 4). As is apparent in Table 2, which summarizes
effect sizes for Hypothesis 1 and Predictions 1a and 1b, the effect
predicted in Prediction 1b was actually always in the right direction (in fact, the average d observed across studies was ⫺0.51) but
consistently smaller than the effect predicted in Prediction 1a
(average d ⫽ 0.86). It is important to realize, however, that the
relative support for Prediction 1a and Prediction 1b is also a
function of the stimuli used: By creating a more likable rebel, we
might still obtain the predicted interaction (Hypothesis 1) because
observers like the rebel significantly more (Prediction 1b), whereas
actors might now rate him or her as likable as the compliant other
(and Prediction 1a would seem unsupported). In fact, this is what
we obtain on agency, a dimension on which our constructed rebel
clearly stood above the compliant other: In Studies 1 and 2,
observers rated the rebel significantly more agentic (Prediction
1b), whereas actors (in Studies 1, 2, or 4) never gave rebels credit
for being agentic (Prediction 1a). Similarly, observers rated the
rebel more moral when they had this opportunity (Study 2),
whereas actors did not.
In regard to Hypotheses 2 and 3, that the rejection of moral
rebels is a reaction to a threat to the self stemming from imagined
rejection, evidence for that contention comes from at least three
Table 2
Effect Sizes on Attraction per Study and Significance
Levels of the Corresponding Tests

Study
Study
Study
Study
Study

1
2
3
4

Hypothesis 1:
Interaction
(partial ␩2)

Prediction 1a:
Actors
(Cohen’s d)

Prediction 1b:
Observers
(Cohen’s d)

.16**
.09*
.05*

1.19*
0.71†
0.61*
0.93**

⫺0.72*
⫺0.53
⫺0.27

Note. Positive numbers on Cohen’s d mean a preference for the compliant
other over the rebel.
*
p ⬍ .05. ** p ⬍ .01. † p ⬍ .10.

MONIN, SAWYER, AND MARQUEZ

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

90

different sources: First, when participants were mere observers (in
Studies 1–3), the same rebel target did not elicit rejection and, if
anything, was more appealing than a compliant other (significant
in Study 1). The importance of self-involvement was the first hint
that the underlying effect was based on self-threat. Second, the
mediating role of imagined rejection (Predictions 2a and 2b, supported in both Studies 3 and 4) suggests that the effect is driven by
the realization that the adequacy of participants’ choice could be
questioned. Third, the role of self-threat may have been best
demonstrated when participants who at first wrote about an important quality or value did not reject the rebel target at all
(Prediction 3a, supported in Study 4). Feeling secure in their sense
of adequacy, these participants were apparently not threatened by
the rebel’s behavior, or the fact that he or she would probably
dislike them—and as a result, they did not derogate. In fact, they
saw rebels as moral and agentic, expressed misgivings about their
own behavior in light of the rebel’s stance, and blamed their own
behavior less on situational factors (Prediction 3b, supported in
Study 4) than did participants who were not self-affirmed.

Alternative Interpretations
Existential Freedom
The idea that individuals are more comfortable turning a blind
eye to their own freedom and attributing their problematic choices
to situational pressures has a venerable past in philosophy (Sartre,
1943/1956), clinical psychology (Fromm, 1941), and social psychology (Festinger, 1957). Are rebels resented because they shatter
the comfort of conformity and remind actors that they were free all
along? Indeed, individuals might not have thought of rebellion as
a behavioral option until rebels made them realize that it was
available. As one of Milgram’s (1965) obedient participants recounts at debriefing, “the thought of stopping didn’t enter my mind
until it was put there by the other two [rebels]” (p. 132). Although
this is a compelling narrative, we find little support for it in our
data. In Study 1, participants did report significantly more perceived choice after seeing the rebel, but this did not correlate
significantly with rejection. When we measured it again in Studies
3 and 4, we did not observe significantly less situational blame
(e.g., “I had no other choice but to select the most obvious
suspect”) when participants saw a rebel than when they saw a
compliant other. Self-affirmed participants who saw a rebel in
Study 4 did blame the situation significantly less than participants
seeing an obedient other, as if they were secure enough to admit
the freedom that rebels so clearly demonstrated, but nonaffirmed
participants did not report less situational blame. Measuring perceived choice and experienced freedom is a notoriously difficult
enterprise (see Gosling, Denizeau, & Oberlé, 2006), but the data
available to us at this point do not strongly support this existential
interpretation, reinforcing our confidence in our imagined
rejection/self-threat model.

Feeling Less Moral Than the Rebel
Another reason why realizing the existence of a more righteous
path is threatening could be that it leads individuals to question
their own morality. This threat may be akin to upward social
comparison (Festinger, 1954), only applied to morality. Resent-

ment could be a defensive measure if perceivers feel that their own
morality pales in comparison to the rebel’s. Of course, individuals
excel at trivializing other people’s positive behavior by attributing
it to social factors rather than to internal dispositions (Ybarra,
2002), so rebels will likely not be granted moral superiority in
many cases; but if the moral stance is unambiguous enough, one
could assume that conformists start questioning their own morality. As Nietzsche (1878/1984) wrote, “arrogance on the part of the
meritorious is even more offensive to us than the arrogance of
those without merit, for merit itself is offensive” (Aphorism
332)—thus sometimes it may not be the perceived selfrighteousness of rebels that people are reacting to, but the threatening thought that they may be on to something. Rather than dwell
on this unpleasant thought, individuals may lash out against superior others as they do when others are superior in ability (Major,
Testa, & Bylsma, 1991; Salovey, 1991; Tesser, 1991), all the more
strongly because of the centrality of morality in people’s selfimage (Allison et al., 1989; Park et al., 2007). Though this interpretation is also compelling, it does not fit the data presented here
very well either. First, although unthreatened participants (observers in Study 2, affirmed actors in Study 4) did describe the rebel as
more moral than the compliant other, threatened actors did not,
suggesting that they were able to deny the rebel any moral credit
for his or her stance. Second, when asked (Study 4), participants
did not report feeling any less moral after seeing the rebel, nor did
they report more self-directed negative emotions (e.g., disappointed with myself), even when this measure came before the
opportunity to derogate the rebel. And finally, although a social
comparison interpretation could reasonably include the presence of
imagined rejection, this rejection should not mediate the effect as
it does in Studies 3 and 4. Thus, we find little support for this
social comparison story in our data, strengthening our faith in the
self-threatening impact of imagined rejection.

Rejection by Whom?
Imagined rejection seems responsible for the self-threat that
triggers rejection. But who is the source of this imagined rejection,
and does it need to be restricted to the rebel? The questions used
to test mediation in Studies 3 and 4 ask how participants think they
would be seen by “the other participant” (i.e., the compliant or
rebel other)—and as previously reported, these questions mediate
the effect. It is conceivable, however, that participants would
anticipate a similar rejection from a random bystander who witnessed both their obedience and the rebel’s stance and that this
generic imagined rejection would similarly mediate the effect. We
suspect that this mediation would obtain, though it may be weaker
than the observed results, and we propose that it would be compatible with our model. Our contention is that imagined rejection
is threatening and that the mere existence of the rebel makes actors
fear that they will be rejected or looked down upon, by the rebel
or others. The imaginary and quasiprojective nature of this mediator makes it less consequential to know who is doing the imagined rejection.

Shame and Guilt
Along similar lines, recent advances in the study of shame stress
the importance of imagined evaluation, even in the absence of real

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

THE REJECTION OF MORAL REBELS

observers. Tangney and Dearing (2002), for instance, wrote that
“although shame doesn’t necessarily involve an actual observing
audience that is present to witness one’s shortcomings, there is
often the imagery of how one’s defective self would appear to
others” (p. 18, italics added). Tangney and Dearing also demonstrated that whereas guilt is focused on a problematic act, shame is
characterized by a threat to the global self. On the basis of the
self-affirmation results of Study 4, we conclude that actors reject
rebels when their sense of being a good, effective person (Steele’s,
1988, “moral and adaptive adequacy”) is under threat. In terms of
self-conscious emotions, the phenomenon of rebel rejection is
therefore more related to shame than to guilt, which may explain
why we observed no effect of condition on feeling “guilty” in
Study 4. We might have had a difference on “ashamed” if this state
descriptor had been included in the survey, though experts (e.g.,
Tangney & Dearing, 2002, p. 47) recognize that respondents’
reluctance (or inability) to acknowledge feelings of shame, and
accompanying defensive biases, make this state an elusive one to
measure. To summarize, the fact that rejection is mediated by an
imagery of rejection and that the global self seems under threat
rather than a single act (as evidenced by the fact that rejection is
eliminated when an unrelated aspect of the self is affirmed beforehand) concur to suggest that the threat triggering rejection resembles recent understandings of shame in the psychological literature.

Theoretical Contributions
The present research represents, to our knowledge, the first
systematic investigation of the rejection of moral rebels. It casts
light on the causes of the phenomenon, raises novel research
questions, and points to directions for future investigation. It also
informs a number of social psychological literatures at the same
time as it draws on them:
1. It contributes to the literature on deviance from group norms
by showing that reactions to deviants can be largely dependent on
the judge’s own past behavior and by showing that the same
deviant can be perceived as normative by some (seen, in fact, as
more moral) and rejected by others.
2. It contributes to the literature on social comparison by showing that other people’s behavior can be threatening not just when
it appears superior, but also indirectly when it implies that others
might look down on us (see also Monin, 2007).
3. It contributes to the self-affirmation literature by documenting
a new source of self-threat and by showing a new consequence of
self-affirmation, the equanimity and benevolence towards a threatening rebel that we observed in Study 4.
4. It contributes to the attraction literature by showing the
complex interplay between exemplary behavior, imagined rejection, and self-confidence in determining who we like and who we
do not.
5. It contributes to the prejudice reduction literature by showing
that individuals who protest racist practices will have greatest
appeal to those outside of the situation, unless they manage to
make individuals in the situation somehow secure in their sense
that they are good people.
6. Finally, it contributes to moral psychology by demonstrating
that moral exemplars do not always receive the respect that they
are supposed to inspire and by showing possible bridges between
moral content and all of the mainstream social psychological

91

traditions touched upon in this section (see also Monin, Pizarro, &
Beer, 2007).

Conclusion
We started with the puzzling observation that the same laudable
rebellion was admired by some and reviled by others. The studies
presented here suggest the importance of involvement as a moderator of this reaction because involved individuals perceive rebellion against a situation that they tacitly accepted as a personal
rejection. Individuals reacted to this imagined rejection by rejecting rebels. Such defensiveness greatly limits the potential impact
of moral leaders in society: If a minimal involvement in the
situation is enough to trigger rejection, then one can imagine the
consequences of a lifetime of passivity when individuals see a
rebel taking a moral stance against the way others live or refusing
to accept the world that others have tolerated all along. By casting
light on these rejection processes, we hope to pave the way for
research on the way moral rebels can be agents of change without
eliciting resentment.

References
Allison, S. T., Messick, D. M., & Goethals, G. R. (1989). On being better
but not smarter than others: The Muhammad Ali effect. Social Cognition, 7, 275–295.
Aronson, J., Blanton, H., & Cooper, J. (1995). From dissonance to disidentification: Selectivity in the self-affirmation process. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 68, 986 –996.
Asch, S. E. (1956). Studies of independence and conformity: A minority of
one against a unanimous majority. Psychological Monographs, 70(9,
Whole No. 416).
Cleaver, E. (1969). Post-prison writings and speeches (R. Scheer, Ed.).
New York: Random House.
Cohen, G. L., Aronson, J., & Steele, C. M. (2000). When beliefs yield to
evidence: Reducing biased evaluation by affirming the self. Personality
and Social Psychology Bulletin, 26, 1151–1164.
Cooper, J., & Fazio, R. (1984). A new look at dissonance theory. In L.
Berkowitz (Ed.), Advances in experimental social psychology (Vol. 17,
pp. 229 –268). San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Czopp, A. M., Monteith, M. J., & Mark, A. Y. (2006). Standing up for
change: Reducing bias through interpersonal confrontation. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 90, 784 – 803.
Devine, P. G., Monteith, M. J., Zuwerink, J. R., & Elliot, A. J. (1991).
Prejudice with and without compunction. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 60, 817– 830.
Elliot, A. J., & Devine, P. G. (1994). On the motivational nature of
cognitive dissonance: Dissonance as psychological discomfort. Journal
of Personality and Social Psychology, 67, 382–394.
Festinger, L. (1954). A theory of social comparison processes. Human
Relations, 7, 117–140.
Festinger, L. (1957). A theory of cognitive dissonance. New York: Harper
& Row.
Frankena, W. K. (1973). Ethics (2nd ed.). Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice
Hall.
Fromm, E. (1941). Escape from freedom. New York: Rinehart.
Galinsky, A. D., Stone, J., & Cooper, J. (2000). The reinstatement of
dissonance and psychological discomfort following failed affirmations.
European Journal of Social Psychology, 30, 123–147.
Gosling, P., Denizeau, M., & Oberlé, D. (2006). Denial of responsibility:
A new mode of dissonance reduction. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 90, 722–733.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

92

MONIN, SAWYER, AND MARQUEZ

Latané, B., & Darley, J. M. (1970). The unresponsive bystander: Why
doesn’t he help? Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Maas, P. (1973). Serpico: The cop who defied the system. New York:
Viking Press.
Major, B., Testa, M., & Bylsma, W. H. (1991). Responses to upward and
downward social comparisons: The impact of esteem-relevance and
perceived control. In J. Suls & T. A. Wills (Eds.), Social comparison:
Contemporary theory and research (pp. 237–260). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Milgram, S. (1965). Liberating effects of group pressure. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 1, 127–134.
Milgram, S. (1974). Obedience to authority: An experimental view. New
York: Harper & Row.
Monin, B. (2007). Holier than me? Threatening social comparison in the
moral domain. International Review of Social Psychology, 20(1), 53– 68.
Monin, B., Pizarro, D. A., & Beer, J. S. (2007). Deciding versus reacting:
Conceptions of moral judgment and the reason-affect debate. Review of
General Psychology, 11, 99 –111.
My Lai massacre hero dies at 62. (2006, January 6). BBC News. Retrieved
November 27, 2007, from http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/americas/
4589486.stm
Nietzsche, F. (1984). Human, all too human: A book for free spirits.
Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press. (Original work published 1878)
Park, H., & Ybarra, O., & Stanik, C. (2007). Self-judgment and reputation
monitoring: Implications for finding stable and dynamic self-aspects.
Manuscript submitted for publication.
Plant, E. A., & Devine, P. G. (1998). Internal and external motivation to
respond without prejudice. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 75, 811– 832.
Rawls, J. (1999). A theory of justice (Rev. ed.). Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
Rosin, H. (2004, May 17). When Joseph comes marching home: In a
Western Maryland town, ambivalence about the son who blew the
whistle at Abu Ghraib. Washington Post, p. C01.
Russell, D. W. (2002). In search of underlying dimensions: The use (and
abuse) of factor analysis in Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin.
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 28, 1629 –1646.

Sabini, J., & Silver, M. (1982). Moral reproach. In J. Sabini & M. Silver
(Eds.), Moralities of everyday life (pp. 35–53). Oxford, England: Oxford
University Press.
Salovey, P. (1991). Social comparison processes in envy and jealousy. In
J. Suls & T. A. Wills (Eds.), Social comparison: Contemporary theory
and research (pp. 261–285). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Sartre, J. P. (1956). Being and nothingness: An essay on phenomenological
ontology. New York: Philosophical Library. (Original work published
1943)
Scher, S. J., & Cooper, J. (1989). Motivational basis of dissonance: The
singular role of behavioral consequences. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 56, 899 –906.
Sherman, D. K., & Cohen, G. L. (2006). The psychology of self-defense:
Self-affirmation theory. In M. P. Zanna (Ed.), Advances in experimental
social psychology (Vol. 38, pp. 183–242). New York: Academic Press.
Spencer, S. J., Fein, S., & Lomore, C. D. (2001). Maintaining one’s
self-image vis-à-vis others: The role of self-affirmation in the social
evaluation of the self. Motivation and Emotion, 25, 41– 65.
Steele, C. M. (1988). The psychology of self-affirmation: Sustaining the
integrity of the self. In L. Berkowitz (Ed.), Advances in experimental
social psychology (Vol. 21, pp. 261–302). New York: Academic Press.
Tangney, J. P., & Dearing, R. L. (2002). Shame and guilt. New York:
Guilford Press.
Tesser, A. (1991). Emotion in social comparison and reflection processes.
In J. Suls & T. A. Wills (Eds.), Social comparison: Contemporary theory
and research (pp. 117–148). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Turiel, E. (1983). The development of social knowledge: Morality and
convention. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Walker, L. J., & Hennig, K. H. (2004). Differing conceptions of moral
exemplarity: Just, brave, and caring. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 86, 629 – 647.
Ybarra, O. (2002). Naı̈ve causal understanding of valenced behaviors and
its implication for social information processing. Psychological Bulletin,
128, 421– 441.
Zanna, M., & Cooper, J. (1974). Dissonance and the pill: An attribution
approach to studying the arousal properties of dissonance. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 29, 703–709.

THE REJECTION OF MORAL REBELS

93

Appendix

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Text of Tapes Used in Study 1
Obedient Condition

Rebel Condition

Reading week should be eliminated at [this university]. It just
causes a number of problems. First, it breaks the momentum of
the quarter, it also allows students less time to receive knowledge from the faculty, which is one of the reasons we’re in
school in the first place, right? We would learn more stuff with
another week of classes. Other universities have more contact
time with the professors, and it would make us more comparable with these other schools. These universities don’t seem to be
hurt by not having a reading week. Students tend to waste a lot
of time during reading week, and they’d be better served by an
extra week of classes. Also, because some of the schools at [this
university] have a reading week and others don’t, eliminating
reading week would make the schedules equivalent across the
schools at [this university].

So now I’m supposed to make a speech saying that reading week
is a bad thing and that we should eliminate it, right? Well you
know what? I don’t think I’m going to do that. I know I was told
to do it and I’m, like, a subject in the study but I’m still free to do
whatever I want, right? And I’m not going to do something that
I’m not 100% comfortable doing, like making the speech just
because I’m told to. I’m sure that’s my right as a participant in this
experiment. I won’t do it. There you have it—my official refusal.
On tape and all. You can keep your money or whatever, I’d rather
not get anything and not do something I have a problem with.
Received July 12, 2007
Revision received September 29, 2007
Accepted October 15, 2007 䡲

