Journal of Personality and Social Psychology
2008, Vol. 94, No. 4, 696 –717

Copyright 2008 by the American Psychological Association
0022-3514/08/$12.00 DOI: 10.1037/0022-3514.94.4.696

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Terror Management and Adults’ Attachment to Their Parents:
The Safe Haven Remains
Cathy R. Cox and Jamie Arndt

Tom Pyszczynski

University of Missouri—Columbia

University of Colorado at Colorado Springs

Jeff Greenberg

Abdolhossein Abdollahi

University of Arizona

Islamic Azad University-Zarand Branch and Kerman Shahid
Bahonar University

Sheldon Solomon
Skidmore College
Six studies examined the role of young adults’ parental attachment in terror management. Studies 1–3
revealed that activating thoughts of one’s parent in response to mortality salience (MS) reduced
death-thought accessibility and worldview defense and increased feelings of self-worth. Studies 4 –5
demonstrated that MS led to greater ease of recalling positive maternal interactions and greater difficulty
recalling negative interactions, and increased attraction to a stranger who was described as being similar
to one’s parent. If reliance on parents for terror management purposes reflects the operation of attachment
mechanisms, then such effects should vary on the basis of an individual’s attachment style. Study 6
demonstrated that, after MS, insecure individuals were more likely to rely on relationships with their
parents, whereas secure individuals were more likely to rely on relationships with romantic partners.
Keywords: terror management, mortality salience, adult attachment, close relationships, parents

Research on adult attachment over the past 2 decades has
provided general support for Bowlby’s (1982) notion, based partly
on Freud (1905/1957), that as people mature, their relationships
with their romantic partners tend to take on many of the psychological functions formerly served by their relationships with their
parents. The management of existential anxiety appears to be
among these functions. A large body of evidence shows that close
relationships serve a terror management function in that they help
people cope with the awareness of the inevitability of death (Mikulincer, Florian, & Hirschberger, 2003, 2004). However, like much

of the adult attachment literature, the extant research connecting
terror management and attachment needs has focused extensively
on romantic and other close peer relationships but not on the
primary attachments that presumably form the impetus for later
attachment representations. The present research explored the role
that the original safe haven provided by one’s parents plays as an
ongoing psychological bulwark against the problem of death.
Drawing from terror management theory (TMT; Greenberg,
Pyszczynski, & Solomon, 1986), in six experiments we examined
whether parental attachment, even in young adulthood, continues
to serve existential needs.

Cathy R. Cox and Jamie Arndt, Department of Psychological Sciences,
University of Missouri—Columbia; Tom Pyszczynski, Department of Psychology, University of Colorado at Colorado Springs; Jeff Greenberg,
Department of Psychology, University of Arizona; Abdolhossein Abdollahi, Department of Psychology, Islamic Azad University-Zarand Branch,
Kerman, Iran, and Department of Psychology, Kerman Shahid Bahonar
University, Kerman, Iran; Sheldon Solomon, Department of Psychology,
Skidmore College.
We thank Ann Hecker and Michelle Carpentier (University of Missouri—Columbia), Jennifer Bowers and Cindy Jenkins (University of
Colorado at Colorado Springs), and Kelsey Hendrickson (Skidmore College) for their help in collecting data for this article.
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Cathy R.
Cox, Department of Psychological Sciences, University of Missouri—
Columbia, McAlester Hall, Columbia, MO 65211. E-mail: crcr25@
mizzou.edu

Attachment and Managing Terror
Despite somewhat different emphases, TMT and attachment
theory share common roots (e.g., Freud, 1930/1939; Horney, 1937;
Mead, 1934; Rank, 1929/1973; Sullivan, 1953) and provide complementary insights into the psychological processes that enable
people to feel secure and manage their fears in a threatening world.
Bowlby’s (1982) attachment theory posits that because the helpless infant’s survival is dependent on the care and protection of
others, infants are predisposed to form attachment relationships
with others (initially the parents) who offer care and protection
against external threats (e.g., starvation). Thus, attachment theory
views distress regulation as the primary impetus for the maintenance of the attachment bonds through which the child’s survival
is assured. A substantial empirical literature accordingly demon696

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

TERROR MANAGEMENT AND ATTACHMENT

strates that individuals rely on attachment figures when faced with
threat (see, e.g., Mikulincer & Shaver, 2003, for a review).
TMT (Greenberg et al., 1986) posits that existential fear rooted
in awareness of death is a primary source of distress and plays a
central role in human motivation and behavior. The theory proposes that people manage this fear by securing self-esteem by
believing in and living up to the standards of a cultural worldview
that imbues life with meaning, order, value, and permanence.
Empirical support for TMT is provided by converging evidence
from over 350 experiments conducted in at least 15 countries
testing variants of five basic hypotheses. This research has shown
that (a) increasing self-esteem makes people less prone to anxiety
in response to threats; (b) subtle reminders of death (mortality
salience; MS) produce increased positive reactions to those who
support one’s worldview and negative reactions to those who
threaten it, increased self-esteem striving, and greater preference
for information that is well-structured or fits specific templates for
meaning; these effects have been obtained relative to a diverse
array of control conditions; (c) increasing self-esteem or validating
one’s worldview eliminates the effect of MS on self-esteem striving and worldview defense; (d) threats to self-esteem or one’s
worldview increase the accessibility of death-related thoughts, and
boosts to self-esteem or faith in one’s worldview reduce the
accessibility of death-related thoughts; and (e) evidence of the
existence of a literal afterlife eliminates the effect of MS on
self-esteem striving and worldview defense. These effects have
been observed across a multitude of different aspects of cultural
worldviews and sources of self-esteem (for a recent review, see
Greenberg, Solomon, & Arndt, 2008).
In the first presentation of TMT, Greenberg et al. (1986) briefly
suggested a terror management function of close relationships due
to the initial role of parents in offering protection from anxiety, and
then later, the capacity of close relationships to bolster an individual’s self-esteem and faith in his or her cultural worldview (i.e.,
worldview validation). Integrating TMT and attachment theory,
Mikulincer and colleagues (2003, 2004) have argued that people
pursue close relationships because they provide protection against
existential concerns through a basic emotional attachment mechanism (Bowlby, 1982), as well as by providing self-esteem and
validation of one’s cultural beliefs.
A considerable body of evidence supports this analysis. For
example, reminders of death lead people to initiate interactions
with other people (Taubman-Ben-Ari, Findler, & Mikulincer,
2002), heighten feelings of personal competence and reduce fear of
rejection (Taubman-Ben-Ari et al., 2002), and increase their desire
for intimacy and commitment in romantic relationships (Florian,
Mikulincer, & Hirschberger, 2002). Furthermore, death-related
primes are among the types of threats that increase the accessibility
of attachment constructs (Mikulincer, Gillath, & Shaver, 2002) and
having participants imagine either a separation from or argument
with a romantic partner increases the accessibility of death-related
thoughts and instigates worldview defense (Florian et al., 2002;
Mikulincer, Florian, Birnbaum, & Malishkevich, 2002). Building
from this research, Hart, Shaver, and Goldenberg (2005) suggested
that because close relationships, self-esteem, and cultural worldviews are developmentally intertwined, threats associated with one
component of the security system result in compensatory activation of other components. Notably, although there is clear evidence

697

for the role of close relationships in terror management research,
all of this research has focused on peer-to-peer relationships.
Studies have yet to consider what role, if any, parental attachment
plays in such processes.

The Present Research
Although Bowlby (1982) focused on the importance of parents as attachment figures in the shaping and functioning of the
attachment system during infancy and childhood, he also believed that a child’s early relationship with his or her parents
serves as a basis, or prototype, for subsequent relationships
throughout the lifespan. Such prototype-like dynamics have
been advanced in the attachment literature by findings that, in
adulthood, there is some degree of overlap between attachment
security in parental and romantic domains (e.g., Collins, 1996;
Owens et al., 1995; Sroufe, Egeland, & Kreutzer, 1990; van
IJzendoorn, 1996; also see Fraley, 2002, for meta-analysis on
attachment stability from infancy to adulthood). This idea has
also been advanced in a variety of studies indicating that as
people mature, their attachment to and use of parents for
emotional security gradually diminishes (e.g., Doherty &
Feeney, 2004; Fraley & Davis, 1997; Furman & Buhrmester,
1992; Hazan & Zeifman, 1994; Mayseless, 2004; Trinke &
Bartholomew, 1997), and their relationships with romantic and
peer partners tend to take on many of the psychological functions formerly served by their relationships with their parents
(see, e.g., Allen & Land, 1999; Cassidy & Shaver, 1999; Hazan
& Shaver, 1987; Mikulincer & Goodman, 2006; Simpson &
Rholes, 1997; Weiss, 1986). Perhaps because of this, little
attention has been paid in personality and social psychology to
the influence of adult affectional ties to parents on psychological well-being across the lifespan.
However, given that the relationship with one’s parents is the
initial attachment bond that creates cognitive models posited to
influence all later relationships (Bowlby, 1982; Freud, 1930/
1939), the question of whether one’s parents continue to provide emotional security and buffer the existential concerns of
the mature adult seems an especially important one for the
continued integration of TMT and attachment theories. To the
extent that parents represent the initial security bond, from a
terror management perspective, they may remain helpful into
adulthood when people need to allay their existential fears. In
other words, if children’s relationship to their parents influences relationships and attachment in later life, and if affectional ties to the parents are an enduring bond across the
lifespan, then such attachment may play a pivotal role in how
adults manage existential concerns about their mortality. The
results of Mikulincer and Shaver (2004) suggest that parents
may indeed play such a role. Parents were more frequently
nominated as attachment figures than other relationships, and
traits associated with parents (like those associated with other
relationships) were likely to be internalized as part of the self.
Further, Fraley and Davis (1997) found that a majority of their
college-aged participants (60%) used their parents as primary
attachment figures. However, in contrast to research examining
the death-anxiety-buffering function of secondary attachment
relationships (e.g., romantic partners, friends; for a review see

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

698

COX ET AL.

Mikulincer et al., 2003, 2004), to our knowledge the following
experiments are the first to empirically explore whether people’s primary attachment to their parents also serve a terror
management function in response to intimations of mortality.
It is important to note that we are not suggesting that parental
relationships uniquely serve terror management functions. The
research cited in the preceding section is quite clear that close
relationships (such as those with romantic partners or friends) are
vital buffers against death-related cognition and play an important
role in terror management processes. Rather, we suggest that an
important question concerns whether for young adults, parents do
so as well and therefore should be added to the lexicon of existential interpersonal resources.
To provide initial insights into whether parental attachments
serve terror management functions, we assessed three basic
hypotheses. First, if parental attachment buffers death-related
concerns, then rendering salient parental representations should
reduce the defensive consequences of death reminders that
would otherwise occur. To examine this possibility, we followed the strategy of previous TMT research. That is, previous
research has established that self-esteem buffers the consequences of concerns about death by finding that situational
boosts to self-esteem as well as opportunities to affirm valued
aspects of the self reduce worldview defense and death-thought
accessibility after MS (e.g., Arndt & Greenberg 1999; Florian et
al., 2002; Harmon-Jones et al., 1997). Building from this literature and seeking to provide an understanding of how parental
attachment can impact terror management processes, we examined in our first line of inquiry whether the activation of
parental representations would attenuate MS induced deaththought accessibility (Study 1) and worldview defense (Study
2). Study 3 extended the analysis by exploring whether the
accessibility of thoughts of a parent would be an important
resource people could use to boost their self-esteem in response
to mortality concerns.
Following the approach of previous research on the effects of
MS on self-esteem and close relationship striving (e.g.,
Dechesne et al., 2003; Mikulincer & Florian, 2000; TaubmanBen-Ari et al., 2002), we focused in our second line of inquiry
on parental attachment as a potential psychological resource to
which people may turn when reminded of their death. That is,
if parents serve an anxiety-buffering function for their adult
offspring, then people should be more positive toward their
parents after MS. This basic idea was examined in Study 4,
which assessed the effect of MS on participants’ ease or difficulty in recalling positive and negative interactions with their
mother. Study 5 explored a further implication of the emerging
theoretical synthesis of attachment theory and TMT (e.g., Hart
et al., 2005; Mikulincer et al., 2003): that existential threat may
affect evaluations of and interactions with others who share
important characteristics with one’s parents. Specifically, we
utilized Andersen’s (e.g., Andersen & Glassman, 1996) work on
transference to examine people’s attitudes and behaviors following thoughts of death toward a person who was described as
being similar or dissimilar to a parent.
The final study (Study 6) explored the role of individual
differences in attachment style in the way existential threats
affect evaluations of parents. Specifically, contemporary re-

search on individual differences in attachment refers to two
orthogonal dimensions: attachment-related anxiety and avoidance (e.g., Brennan, Clark, & Shaver, 1998). Research has
consistently found that securely attached individuals (those
scoring low on both dimensions), more than insecure persons,
react to threats with an increased tendency to seek out close
others for support (e.g., B. C. Feeney & Collins, 2001). This is
also the case with regard to reactions elicited by reminders of
death. For example, in Mikulincer and Florian (2000), secure
persons reacted to MS with a heightened desire for intimacy in
their romantic relationships, whereas anxious and avoidants
persons did not (also see Taubman-Ben-Ari et al., 2002). Furthermore, making salient a romantic partner mitigated MSinduced worldview defense only for securely attached individuals.
The lack of effects among those high in attachment anxiety may
reflect the specific focus of prior research on adult attachments.
Anxiously attached individuals may be unlikely to rely on adult
relationships to cope with existential threat because they lack the
ability to maintain secure adult attachments (e.g., Hazan & Shaver,
1987). Further, although parents and peers can accomplish the
same anxiety-buffering function in young adulthood for secure
individuals (e.g., Doherty & Feeney, 2004; Fraley & Davis, 1997;
Hazan & Zeifman, 1994; Trinke & Bartholomew, 1997), more
anxious individuals may rely on parents because they have problems transferring attachment functions to extrafamilial figures
(e.g., Allen & Land, 1999; Mayseless, 2004). Because no prior
adult studies have compared preferences for the solace of different
relationships after threat, in Study 6, we included such a comparison to assess the possibility that whereas romantic relationships
best serve the terror management needs of securely attached adults,
anxious adults will turn to parents when terror management is
needed.

STUDIES 1–3: PARENTAL REPRESENTATIONS AS
A BUFFER OF MORTALITY SALIENCE EFFECTS
Study 1
If secure images of parental attachment offer protection from
death-related concerns, activating positive cognitive representations of one’s mother should attenuate the delayed increase in
death-thought accessibility that has been found to follow reminders of death. To examine this possibility, in Study 1 we
randomly assigned participants to a 2 (MS: death vs. dental
pain) ⫻ 4 (parent prime: positive parent, negative parent, positive acquaintance, or neutral acquaintance) factorial design,
and we measured the accessibility of death-related thoughts
with a word stem completion task. If parents fulfill an anxietybuffering role for their adult offspring, then people should
complete fewer death-related words following a manipulation
that emphasizes positive support from one’s mother. To ascertain whether any activation of parental representations would
attenuate post MS death-thought accessibility, we also included
a condition in which participants were asked to visualize a
critical, negative interaction with a parent. Finally, to assess
whether the predicted effects are specific to activating thoughts
of one’s mother and not just a positive interaction with another

TERROR MANAGEMENT AND ATTACHMENT

person, we included a condition in which participants were
asked to write about a positive interaction with a recent acquaintance.

Method
Participants

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

One hundred and forty-three students (92 women and 50 men; 1
person did not report his or her age and gender but was included)
from two universities participated in exchange for course credit.
Ages ranged from 17 to 54 years (M ⫽ 21.81, SD ⫽ 6.71).1

Materials and Procedure
Participants completed a packet of materials described as a
personality assessment. All questionnaires were identical except
for the MS and parent prime manipulations.
Mortality salience. To maintain the cover story, we included
in all packets filler questionnaires and then, following previous
research (Rosenblatt, Greenberg, Solomon, Pyszczynski, & Lyon,
1989), we randomly assigned participants to answer questions
related to either death or another aversive topic. In the MS conditions, the questions were “Please briefly describe the emotions
that the thought of your own death arouse in you” and “Jot down,
as specifically as you can, what you think will happen to you as
you physically die and once you are physically dead.” In the
control condition, participants were asked parallel questions about
experiencing dental pain. This has been the most commonly used
aversive thought control condition, and prior research has shown
that it yields results similar to other aversive thought control
conditions concerning topics, such as uncertainty, upcoming exams, and social exclusion, and similar to neutral control conditions
as well (e.g., Landau et al., 2004a, 2004b; Routledge, Arndt, &
Goldenberg, 2004; Schimel et al., 1999).
Delay– distraction. Evidence suggests that distal MS effects
occur when thoughts of death are highly accessible but outside of
conscious awareness (Pyszczynski, Greenberg, & Solomon, 1999).
Therefore, we asked participants to complete the Positive and
Negative Affect Schedule (PANAS; Watson, Clark, & Tellegen,
1988) and a word search task to provide a 3- to 5-min delay. The
word search puzzle was a 10 ⫻ 10 matrix of letters with instructions asking people to search and circle 10 neutral words (e.g.,
book, movie). We used the PANAS in subsequent analyses to
determine whether MS influenced people’s mood, although previous research indicates that it typically does not (see, e.g., Greenberg, Solomon, & Pyszczynski, 1997).2
Parent prime. The second independent variable consisted of
a visualization task based on Baldwin and Sinclair’s (1996)
research. Specifically, participants were asked to imagine either
a negative or positive interaction with a parent. In the positive
condition participants were told “Please write about a time
where your mother expressed a positive opinion of you. That is,
write about a time when your mother was nonevaluative and
simply accepted your for who you are.” In the negative condition, participants were instructed to consider a time where their
mother held a “somewhat negative opinion” and “was very
evaluative and accepted you only to the extent that you lived up

699

to certain standards.” As in Baldwin and Sinclair, participants
in a third control condition were asked to write about a recent
acquaintance (i.e., “someone you recently met”). Finally, we
included a fourth condition wherein participants were asked to
write about a positive interaction with a recent acquaintance.
The instructions were identical to the positive parent condition
except the word mother was replaced with someone you recently met. In all conditions, students were instructed to visualize being in the presence of this person (i.e., to imagine the
person’s eye color, hair color, sound of his or her voice) and to
express their thoughts and feelings associated with this person
by writing for the length of a page.
Death-thought accessibility. We used a word stem completion task to measure the accessibility of death-related thoughts;
this served as the dependent variable. This task is similar to
those used in other research (e.g., Bassili & Smith, 1986;
Gilbert & Hixon, 1991; Steele & Aronson, 1995; Tulving,
Schacter, & Stark, 1982) and presents participants with 25 word
fragments, 5 of which could be completed with a neutral or
death-related word. This measure has been used successfully in
a many terror management studies (e.g., Greenberg, Pyszczynski, Solomon, Simon, & Breus, 1994; Mikulincer & Florian,
2000). Examples of the neutral words include TAB _ _ (table),
_ _ OK (book), and WAT _ _ (water). The death completions
were DE _ _ (dead or deed), GRA _ _ (grave or grape),
SK _ _ L (skull or skill), COFF _ _ (coffin or coffee), and
KI _ _ ED (killed or kissed). Death accessibility scores were the
total number of death-related word completions.

Results and Discussion
Death-Thought Accessibility
The hypothesis that priming a positive interaction with one’s
mother would attenuate death-thought accessibility after reminders
of death was tested with a 2 (MS: death vs. dental pain) ⫻ 4
(parent prime: positive parent, negative parent, positive acquaintance, or neutral acquaintance) between-subjects analysis of variance (ANOVA) on death-thought accessibility scores. The results
revealed main effects for MS, F(1, 135) ⫽ 18.09, p ⬍ .001, d ⫽
.99 (with greater accessibility in the MS condition), and parent
prime conditions, F(3, 135) ⫽ 3.14, p ⫽ .03, d ⫽ .72 (with less
accessibility in the positive parent condition). These effects were
qualified by the predicted two-way interaction, F(3, 135) ⫽ 2.79,
p ⫽ .04, d ⫽ .66 (see Figure 1).
Replicating previous research, in the neutral acquaintance conditions, MS led to higher death-thought accessibility than the
salience of dental pain, F(1, 135) ⫽ 9.69, p ⫽ .002, d ⫽ .89.
1
All studies began with an informed consent process and concluded
with a demographic page requesting participants’ age and gender (no
gender or age effects were found, Fs ⬍ 1), as well as a detailed debriefing.
2
In all six experiments, we conducted a one-way ANOVA on the two
subscales of the PANAS to examine whether the MS manipulation had an
effect on people’s mood, which would affect the dependent variables.
Consistent with previous research, the results revealed no significant difference between death and the control conditions on the two subscales
(Fs ⱕ 1, ps ⱖ .29).

COX ET AL.

700
4

Death-Acessibility Scores

3.5
3
2.5

Death
Dental Pain

2
1.5
1
0.5
0

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Cell ns =

17

17

Positive
Mother

19

20

Negative
Mother

18

19

Neutral

16

17

Positive
Neutral

Relationship Prime

Figure 1. Death accessibility scores as a function of mortality salience
and parent primes (Study 1). A higher score reflects greater death-thought
accessibility. Error bars represent standard deviations for each condition.

Critically, as expected, there was no significant difference between
MS and dental pain conditions after participants were primed with
an accepting, positive mother (F ⬍ 1). A third comparison was
conducted to determine whether priming a critical, negative
mother would similarly attenuate the activation of death-related
thought (reflecting perhaps a global buffering effect of the attachment system) or whether only positive memories of one’s mother
produce this effect. Consistent with the latter hypothesis, the
results revealed that after being primed with a critical, negative
mother, people in the MS condition completed more death-related
words compared to the dental pain condition, F(1, 135) ⫽ 11.23,
p ⫽ .001, d ⫽ .92. A fourth comparison found that within the
positive acquaintance condition, participants reported greater
death-thought accessibility when primed with death (vs. dental
pain), F(1, 135) ⫽ 6.41, p ⫽ .01, d ⫽ .52.
We also assessed the effect of parent primes within MS
conditions. There was a significant difference among cells in
the death, F(3, 135) ⫽ 5.78, p ⫽ .001, d ⫽ .87, but not dental
pain conditions (F ⬍ 1). Within the MS condition, activating a
positive, accepting interaction with one’s mother led to lower
death-thought accessibility than a critical, negative interaction
with one’s mother, and either a positive or neutral interaction
with a recent acquaintance (Fs ⱖ 2.97, ps ⱕ .03, ds ⱖ .71). No
significant differences emerged between the negative parent
and acquaintance conditions or between the two acquaintance
conditions (Fs ⬍ 1).
Study 1 offers initial support for the hypothesis that positive
cognitive representations of one’s parents provide a buffer
against the increased accessibility of death-related thoughts
produced by reminders of one’s mortality. When reminded of
death, participants who were asked to think about a critical,
negative interaction with their mother; a positive, accepting
interaction with a recent acquaintance; or a neutral relationship
with a recent acquaintance evidenced greater death-thought
accessibility compared to those in other conditions. Importantly, however, recalling an accepting, positive interaction
with their mother reduced participants’ death-thought accessi-

bility. Taken together, these results provide some insight into
how parents play a critical role in defending against existential
concerns. Further, the current study clearly demonstrates that
any positive relationship (i.e., an acquaintance) will not reproduce the mitigation of death-thought accessibility, suggesting
that the current results are not due to feelings of acceptance or
positive thoughts in general.
There are, however, a few issues with this study. One limitation involves the parent prime manipulation that was used.
Specifically, Baldwin and Sinclair (1996) designed the visualization task to determine whether priming interpersonal acceptance or rejection is an important factor in the social construction of self-esteem. Variants of this manipulation have
subsequently been used to explore the consequences of different
(intrinsic or extrinsic) contingencies of self-worth on general
defensiveness (e.g., Arndt, Schimel, Greenberg, & Pyszczynski,
2002). This suggests that it is important to consider whether we
were manipulating aspects of self-esteem rather than the salience of parental approval. But from a TMT perspective, positive feedback from the parent is an initial impetus for the
development and desire for self-esteem (e.g., Solomon, Greenberg, & Pyszczynski, 1991). Because evaluations from one’s
parents are conceptually linked to self-esteem, teasing these
variables apart would be exceedingly difficult. Therefore, in
Studies 2 and 3, we adopted a different strategy for assessing
the anxiety-buffering role of parents. First, instead of using a
positively or negatively toned visualization task, participants
were simply asked to write about a relationship with a parent.
Second, unlike the previous experiments, participants were
allowed to select which parent they chose to write about,
allowing the opportunity to generalize results beyond the
mother– child affectional bond.
Another issue is that Study 1 did not compare the buffering
effects of parental relationships to other attachment relationships.
The present analysis posits that, like other close relationships
(Mikulincer et al., 2003), parents continue to provide a terror
management resource for their young adult children. However, we
have yet to determine whether priming parental and other close
attachment figures engenders similar effects within the same study.

Study 2
Similar to Study 1, participants were randomly assigned to write
about their thoughts and feelings associated with death or, in this
case, the control topic of losing a limb, to provide another elicitation of a generally aversive cognition. In addition, as in the
previous experiment, participants were randomly assigned to complete a visualization task in which they were asked to recall an
interaction with a parent, an interaction with a close friend, or a
neutral interaction with a recent acquaintance. The dependent
measure asked people to evaluate a series of cultural transgressions, an approach that has been widely used in previous terror
management research to assess worldview defense (e.g., Florian &
Mikulincer, 1997). Consistent with previous research (see, e.g.,
Greenberg et al., 1997), we predicted that MS, relative to an
aversive control, would lead people to respond more negatively to
cultural transgressions in the absence of a parent and close friend
prime. In contrast, to the extent that parents and close friends fulfill

TERROR MANAGEMENT AND ATTACHMENT

a terror management function, we hypothesized that making salient
such relationships would eliminate these effects. Of course, a
critical contingency of this hypothesis is that the parent and close
friend do indeed function as an important attachment relationship
for the individual. To provide a check on this assumption, we had
participants complete a variant of the WHOTO scale; a measure
that has been previously used to establish the attachment status of
a relationship (e.g., Fraley & Davis, 1997; Hazan & Zeifman,
1994).

Method
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Participants
Participants were 40 women and 20 men from the University of
Missouri—Columbia who volunteered to participate in exchange
for credits toward a psychology course. Ages ranged from 18 to 21
years (M ⫽ 18.87, SD ⫽ 0.89).

Materials and Procedure
Participants completed a packet of materials in a laboratory
setting. All packets were identical in content except for the MS and
relationship manipulations.
MS. Following a series of personality fillers, participants answered the same open-ended questions about death described in
Study 1. In the control condition, participants were asked parallel
questions about losing a limb, thus providing a different aversive
control group. Because, as noted above, MS effects occur when
death thoughts are highly accessible but outside current conscious
awareness, we had participants complete the PANAS and a word
search to provide a delay.
Relationship manipulation. We used a modified version of
the visualization task described in Study 1. First, instead of
using a positively versus negatively toned visualization task, we
randomly assigned participants to write about a particular relationship partner. Second, participants were allowed to select
which parent they chose to write about, allowing the opportunity to generalize beyond the mother– child affectional bond.
Specifically, in the parent condition, participants were told to
“write about your parent or parent-like figure”; in the friend
condition, participants were told to “write about your closest or
best friend”; whereas in the neutral condition, participants were
told to “write about someone you met recently.” With these
exceptions, the instructions were otherwise identical to those
used in Study 1.
Worldview defense. The dependent measure was a modified
version of Florian and Mikulincer’s (1997) Multidimensional Social Transgressions Scale consisting of four vignettes assessing
reactions to both moral transgressions (i.e., an organizer running
off with students’ tuition money, a burglar destroying an artist’s
life masterpiece; also see Florian & Mikulincer, 1997) and participants’ worldviews (i.e., an immigrant farm laborer criticizing the
United States, students burning the American flag in protest; see
also Cox, Goldenberg, Arndt, & Pyszczynski, 2007). For each
scenario, participants were asked to indicate, “How severe was this
wrongdoing?” and “How heavily should this person be punished?”
All responses were made on a 7-point scale ranging from 1 (not at

701

all) to 7 (very). To assess attitudes toward worldview threatening
others, we averaged questions for the four transgression scenarios
together to make a worldview defense score (␣ ⫽ .74).
WHOTO scale. To confirm whether parents and close
friends serve as attachment figures, we had participants complete a modified version of the WHOTO scale (Fraley & Davis,
1997; Hazan & Zeifman, 1994; also see J. A. Feeney & Hohaus,
2001, for similar procedures). Specifically, participants were
instructed to recall the person they were asked to write about
earlier and answer a series of eight questions. Three questions
tapped into the proximity-related function (e.g., “I like to spend
time with my parent”), three items tapped into the safe-haven
function (e.g., “I turn to my parent for comfort and support
when I am upset”), and two items tapped into the secure base
function (e.g., “I can always count on my relationship with my
parent”). Instructions and questions substituted closest or best
friend and someone you met recently for parent, depending on
condition. For each statement, participants were asked to rate
how much they agreed or disagreed on a 9-point scale ranging
from 1 (not at all) to 9 (totally). Following previous research
(e.g., Doherty & Feeney, 2004; Fraley & Davis, 1997; Hazan &
Zeifman, 1994; Markiewicz, Lawford, Doyle, & Haggart,
2006), we calculated WHOTO scores by taking the mean response for the three separate subscales (␣s ⱖ .90).

Results and Discussion
WHOTO
We performed a 2 (MS: death vs. losing a limb) ⫻ 3 (relationship: parent vs. friend vs. neutral) between-subjects
ANOVA on the three subscales of the WHOTO. Across all
analyses, the results showed a significant effect for relationship,
Fs(2, 54) ⱖ 8.85, ps ⱕ .001, ds ⫽ 1.00, but no significant effect
of MS or interaction between relationship and MS (Fs ⱕ 1.87,
ps ⱖ 16). Pairwise comparisons revealed that both a parent and
friend were rated more highly as serving an attachment function
(i.e., proximity seeking, safe haven, and secure base) than a
neutral acquaintance (Fs ⱖ 3.75, ps ⱕ .05, ds ⱖ 1.00). Further,
there was no significant difference between parent and friend
scores on secure base and safe haven functioning (Fs ⱕ 2.84,
ps ⱖ 10); however, a friend (M ⫽ 8.48, SD ⫽ 0.73) was rated
more highly than a parent (M ⫽ 7.45, SD ⫽ 1.75) on proximity
seeking, F(1, 36) ⫽ 5.68, p ⫽ .02, d ⫽ .64. These results are
consistent with Hazan and Zeifman (1994), who found that
components of attachment are transferred from parents to peers
in a particular order with proximity seeking first. They are also
in line with other work (e.g., Doherty & Feeney, 2004; Markiewicz et al., 2006) showing that although peers may be sought
out more on a regular basis for attachment functions in late
adolescence, parents continue to provide an important basis of
security (safe haven and secure base) for their adult offspring.

Worldview Defense
Preliminary analyses revealed that which parent participants
wrote about did not affect the results, so this variable is not

COX ET AL.

mentioned further.3 A 2 (MS: death vs. losing a limb) ⫻ 3
(relationship: parent vs. friend vs. neutral) between-subjects
ANOVA was performed on the mean transgression score. The
results revealed a significant two-way interaction, F(2, 54) ⫽
4.15, p ⫽ .02, d ⫽ .71, but no main effects (Fs ⬍ 1; see Figure
2).4 To explicate this interaction, we conducted tests for simple
effects of MS within each relationship condition. As predicted
and replicating many prior studies, MS (relative to losing a
limb) increased defensive reactions to moral transgressors in
the neutral acquaintance condition, F(1, 54) ⫽ 6.46, p ⫽ .01,
d ⫽ .60. In contrast, priming an interaction with a parent and a
friend eliminated this effect (Fs ⬍ 1). We also performed
simple effects analyses within each level of the MS manipulation. After MS, participants primed with an acquaintance evidenced more negative responses to the transgressions than
participants primed with either a parent or friend (both Fs ⱖ
6.85, ps ⱕ .02, d ⱖ .70), but there was no significant difference
between the parent and friend conditions (F ⬍ 1). Within the
control condition (losing a limb), there was no significant
difference between relationships (Fs ⬍ 1).
The results of Study 2 provide additional support for the hypothesis that parents serve an anxiety-buffering function for their
adult offspring. First, as expected, in the neutral relationship condition, MS led participants to favor a more punitive stance toward
moral transgressions, a finding in line with previous research (e.g.,
Cox et al., 2007; Florian & Mikulincer, 1997) examining worldview defense with such scenarios. Furthermore, as expected, asking people to visualize an interaction with a parent and a close
friend eliminated this effect.
Overall, these findings are important for three reasons. First,
whereas Study 1 examined death-thought accessibility, this study
extends the parental buffering effect to another well-documented
consequence of MS (i.e., worldview defense). Second, whereas
Study 1 only compared a parental prime to a recent acquaintance,
here we were able to see that parents function similarly to other
close relationships (e.g., a best friend). Third, although the first

7
6
Transgression Scores

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

702

5
4

Death
Losing a Limb

3
2
1
0

Cell ns =

10

10

Parent

10

10

Friend

10

10

Neutral

Relationship Prime

Figure 2. Transgression evaluations as a function of mortality salience
and relationship primes (Study 2). A higher score indicates increased
worldview defense. Error bars represent standard deviations for each
condition.

study shows that a parent might help people deal with distress, it
is not clear whether these effects have anything to do with attachment mechanisms per se. Study 2 informed this issue and found
that both parents and close friends received higher scores on the
WHOTO scale, demonstrating that both relationships more
strongly fulfill attachment needs for our participants. However,
further evidence that parents are a part of their adult offspring’s
attachment matrix would be provided by showing similar effects
when parents are primed as when another close relationship, such
as that with a romantic partner, is primed. Study 3 was designed in
part to test this possibility.

Study 3
Previous research has shown that reminders of death increase
various forms of self-esteem striving (see Pyszczynski, Greenberg,
Solomon, Arndt, & Schimel, 2004, for a review). Interestingly,
research investigating possible direct effects of MS on self-esteem
scores have yielded null or inconsistent results (e.g., Koole,
Dechesne, & van Knippenberg, 2001; Sowards, Moniz, & Harris,
1991). Pyszczynski et al. (2004) argued that this is because people
are not free to believe anything they like, and must, to a certain
extent, base their self-evaluations on some semblance of reality
(i.e., they must maintain an illusion of objectivity about the manner
in which their self-evaluations are derived; Pyszczynski & Greenberg, 1987). This implies that when the need for self-esteem is
increased by reminders of death, people will work especially hard
to demonstrate their worth to both themselves and others, and will
recruit whatever resources they have available to support positive
feelings about themselves. To the extent that close interpersonal
attachments are important sources of self-worth (Bartholomew &
Horowitz, 1991; Brennan & Bosson, 1998; Brennan & Morris,
1997; Crocker, Luhtanen, Cooper, & Bouvrette, 2003; Griffin &
Bartholomew, 1994a; Mikulincer, 1995; Murray, Griffin, Rose, &
3
In both Studies 2 and 3, we checked to see if which parent participants
chose to write about played a role in the effects of interest. In Study 2, 65%
of participants chose to write about their mother, 30% of participants chose
to write about their father, and 5% of participants chose to write about both,
and WHOTO scores were not related to which parent was written about
(F ⬍ 1). In Study 3, 45% of the participants chose to write about their
mother, 50% of participants chose to write about their father, and 5% of
participants chose to write about both. In both studies, there was no effect
of MS on which parent participants wrote about ( ps ⱖ .41), and which
parent was written about did not influence responses on the dependent
measures (Fs ⬍ 1).
4
We conducted a series of analyses to determine whether individual
differences on the WHOTO could explain the effects of the relationship
prime on the evaluation of moral transgressions. Separate 2 (MS: death vs.
losing a limb) x 3 (relationship: parent vs. friend vs. neutral) analyses of
covariances (with WHOTO subscale scores entered as covariates in separate analyses) revealed no main effects of the WHOTO (Fs ⱕ 1.88, ps ⱖ
.18). Further, including the separate subscales in the model did not affect
the significant two-way interaction between MS and relationship primes on
transgression scores (Fs ⱖ 4.06, ps ⱕ .02). Further, to determine whether
more attached individuals reported less worldview defense after MS and
the relationship primes, we examined within-cell correlations between the
WHOTO and moral transgression scores. These analyses were nonsignificant (rs ⱕ .45, ps ⱖ .19).

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

TERROR MANAGEMENT AND ATTACHMENT

Bellavia, 2003; Park, Crocker, & Mickelson, 2004), we would
expect that the recent priming of caring attachment figures would
make it easier to feel good about oneself when faced with existential threats.
Study 3 tested this hypothesis by reminding participants of
either death or an aversive control topic, priming thoughts of
relationship figures or neutral others, and then assessing selfesteem. We measured self-esteem at the implicit level by using a
pen-and-paper implicit association task (IAT; Greenwald,
McGhee, & Schwartz, 1998).5 To continue our exploration of
possible similarities and differences between parental attachment
and other types of attachment relationships, we primed thoughts of
either a parent, a romantic partner (the most commonly studied
type of adult attachment figure), and a neutral other. To the extent
that close relationships serve as a buffer against existential anxieties, activating parental and romantic relationships following reminders of death should lead people to feel secure and, thus,
exhibit higher implicit feelings of self-worth.

Method
Participants
Forty-nine women and 29 men recruited from introductory
psychology classes at the University of Missouri—Columbia participated in exchange for course credit. Ages ranged from 18 to 22
years (M ⫽ 18.84, SD ⫽ 0.91).

Materials and Procedure
Participants completed questionnaire packets in a classroom
setting and were given course credit for participation. At two times
during the course of the study, participants were instructed to stop
working by a “stop” page in the questionnaire packets to complete
an IAT.
Practice IAT. Greenwald et al. (1998) developed the IAT to
measure automatic concept–attribute associations. An assumption
of the test is that strongly associated (compatible) attribute concept
pairs (e.g., the concepts flower and pleasant) should be easier to
classify together than weakly associated or opposed (incompatible)
attribute concept pairs (flower and unpleasant). Strength of association is calculated by comparing one pairing (flower, pleasant) to
another type of pairing (flower, unpleasant; Greenwald et al.,
1998).
In the present study, IAT procedures were modeled closely after
those used by Nosek and Lane (1999; also see Teachman, Gapinski, Brownell, Rawlins, & Jeyaram, 2003, for similar procedures
with a pencil and paper version).6 Practice trials were included to
teach participants the IAT procedure. The task was explained as an
attitudes questionnaire, and participants were told they would be
categorizing words on the basis of category labels presented at the
top of each page. Participants were informed that this was a timed
task and instructed to work as quickly as possible while making as
few errors as possible. They were also instructed to place their pen
or pencil in a box at the top of the page and wait for the experimenter’s signal to begin. Participants were presented with the
category labels and words for the task and were asked to briefly
study the words they would be classifying. Finally, they were told

703

to attend to the category labels presented at the top of each page
because the categories changed from page to page.
Once participants read the instructions and were ready to begin
the IAT, the experimenter told them to turn to the next page. Half
of the participants were presented with insect or bad (flower or
good) first, and the other half were presented with insect or good
(flower or bad) first. Participants were given 20 s to classify 40
words. When the experimenter said “stop,” participants were instructed to turn the page and place their pen or pencil in a box at
the top of the next page and wait for the signal to begin classifying
the words on that page. On this next page, participants classified
words with the opposing category labels (again 20 s to classify 40
words). We counterbalanced the two tasks to eliminate order
effects. Following the first IAT, participants were told to work
through the remainder of the packet at their own pace. An example
of the pen-and-paper-based version of the IAT can be obtained at
www.briannosek.com.
MS. Following a series of personality fillers, participants were
randomly assigned to write about death or experiencing personal
failure. We adopted failure to control for the threat of self-relevant
aversive cognition, and it has been used in a number of prior terror
management studies (e.g., Arndt, Greenberg, & Cook, 2002).
Following the MS manipulation, we had everyone complete the
PANAS Mood scale (Watson et al., 1988) and a word search
puzzle to provide a delay before assessment of the primary dependent measure.
Relationship prime. Participants were asked to complete a
visualization identical to the one described in Study 2. However,
rather than having people imagine a relationship with a close
friend, we randomly assigned participants to write about a romantic partner, a parent, or, in the control condition, a recent acquaintance. In the romantic partner condition, participants were instructed to write about their “current or most recent romantic
partner.”
Implicit self-esteem. The dependent measure consisted of a
pen-and-paper IAT designed to measure implicit self-esteem (see
5
Although much of the research on attachment and self-esteem has
relied on explicit self-report measures (e.g., Bartholomew & Horowitz,
1991; Collins & Read, 1990; J. A. Feeney & Noller, 1990; Mickelson,
Kessler, & Shaver, 1997), we decided to use an IAT in the current study for
a couple of reasons. First, as already noted, previous TMT research on the
effects of MS on (explicit) self-esteem has produced mixed results (e.g.,
Koole et al., 2001; Sowards et al., 1991). Since the current study was
looking at the intersection between attachment, terror management, and
self-esteem concerns, we decided to use the IAT procedure. Second, in
light of previous work that has found that explicit self-esteem is a poor
predictor of people’s quality of relationship with their parents (see, e.g.,
Farnham, Greenwald, & Banaji, 1999, for a review), the IAT was useful in
the present study to determine whether adult children’s self-esteem is
related to parental attachment.
6
Since the study was conducted in a classroom setting (i.e., 10 –15
students/session), we chose the pencil-and-paper-based version of the IAT
because it could be administered to large groups of people at one time
setting. Previous research on the similarities and differences between
paper-and-pencil and computerized IAT tasks have found that the two
measures are highly correlated with one another (r ⫽ .91; Nosek & Lane,
1999).

COX ET AL.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Greenwald & Farnham, 2000, for similar implicit self-esteem
procedures). Following procedures outlined above, participants
were given two categorization tasks in which they were given 20 s
to classify 40 words that were presented on a list on a single page
with categorization instructions printed on both the left and right
side of the column of critical words. For one of these categorization tasks, the left column asked participants whether the words
were related to either self (myself, me, my, self, mine) or good
(wonderful, smile, happy, joy, pleasure), and the right column
asked participants whether the words were related to either other
(other, they, their, them, theirs) or bad ( pain, grief, agony, sickness, terrible). For the second task, the combination was reversed
so that participants were to categorize words as either self-related
or bad on the left side of the page while also categorizing these
same words as either other-related or good on the right side of the
page. We counterbalanced the two tasks to eliminate any order
effects. As with the practice IAT, participants were asked to work
as quickly and accurately as possible, and they were told to try to
avoid making mistakes (e.g., misclassifying a word) but to continue without stopping if this was to occur.
Following procedures outlined by Nosek and Lane (1999) and
Teachman et al. (2003), we checked data to make sure that participants completed a minimum of five correctly identified items
for each IAT page as evidence that they understood and attended
to the task. Additionally, IAT pages were inspected for high error
rates (i.e., ⱖ35% incorrectly classified items). Data for 2 women
were excluded because of excessive errors, thereby bringing the
total sample size down to 76 individuals. We calculated scores by
counting the number of correctly classified words for each task
(dropping all errors).7 Thus, the variable of interest was the difference in the number of correctly classified items under the two
category pairings (i.e., the compatible block [self ⫹ good] minus
the incompatible block [self ⫹ bad]). Therefore, a higher score
indicates higher feelings of self-esteem.

Results and Discussion
To examine whether reminders of mortality interact with parent
and romantic partner primes to affect self-esteem, we performed a
2 (MS: death vs. failure) ⫻ 3 (relationship: parent vs. romantic
partner vs. neutral) between-subjects ANOVA on the IAT selfesteem scores.8 The results revealed a marginal effect for MS, F(1,
70) ⫽ 3.64, p ⫽ .06, d ⫽ .47, with participants in the death
condition (M ⫽ 7.63, SD ⫽ 4.92) manifesting higher selfesteem than participants in the failure control condition (M ⫽
5.50, SD ⫽ 5.08). The results also showed the predicted MS ⫻
Relationship Prime interaction, F(2, 70) ⫽ 3.64, p ⫽ .03, d ⫽
.65 (see Figure 3).
Tests for simple main effects revealed that whereas there was no
effect of MS in the neutral acquaintance prime condition, F(1,
10) ⫽ 1.21, p ⫽ .28, both parent and romantic partner prime
participants evidenced higher implicit self-esteem after MS than
failure salience, both Fs(1, 70) ⱖ 4.23, ps ⱕ .04, ds ⱖ .42. Looked
at differently, within the MS conditions, there was a significant
effect for priming condition, F(2, 70) ⫽ 4.35, p ⫽ .02, d ⫽ .74.
Specific comparisons indicated that after being reminded of death,
both parent and romantic partner primes, which did not differ from
each other (F ⬍ 1), led to higher self-esteem than the acquaintance

14
12
Implicit Self-Esteem

704

10
Death
Failure

8
6
4
2
0

Cell ns =

12

10

Parent

15

13

Romantic Partner

13

13

Neutral

Relationship Prime

Figure 3. Implicit self-esteem scores as a function of mortality salience
and relationship primes (Study 3). A higher score indicates higher implicit
self-esteem. Error bars represent standard deviations for each condition.

prime, both Fs ⱖ 7.61, ps ⱕ .01, ds ⱖ .76. There was no
significant difference among the three relationships within the
failure condition (Fs ⬍ 1).
As would be expected if attachment figures are important
sources of self-esteem that are used to buttress self-worth when the
need for protection from existential concerns is heightened, participants who were reminded of death and primed with thoughts of
either their parents or romantic partners showed elevated levels of
implicit self-esteem. In the absence of priming to increase the
accessibility of these persons as sources of self-esteem, MS had no
effect on implicit self-esteem. This is consistent with previous
findings that self-esteem is not increased after MS without a basis
for feeling better about oneself. Similarly, in the absence of MS,
priming thoughts of attachment figures did not influence selfesteem. This suggests that the findings of Study 3 reflect a combination of increased need for self-esteem produced by the reminder of death coupled with increased resources for self-esteem
provided by the accessibility of thoughts of an attachment figure.
As with Study 2’s finding regarding the role of thoughts of close
friends in deflecting the impact of MS on worldview defense, the
effects of priming thoughts of one’s parents were equivalent to that
of priming thoughts of another close relationship figure, in this
case, a romantic partner. This implies, as most attachment theorists
7
Following Nosek and Lane (1999) and Teachman et al. (2003), incorrectly identified items were not included in the difference score because
errors indicate misunderstanding of the instructions or an effort to increase
speed at the cost of accuracy, which would distort the actual implicit bias.
8
In Studies 3 and 6, we examined whether the pattern of results varied
depending on whether participants were currently involved in a romantic
relationship. In Study 3, 40% of the participants indicated that they were in
a romantic relationship (ranging from 1 to 84 months, M ⫽ 14.91, SD ⫽
15.72); whereas in Study 6, 42% of the participants reported being in a
current romantic relationship (ranging from 1 to 48 months, M ⫽ 13.22,
SD ⫽ 11.73). Across both studies, that there were no significant effects of
relationship status or interaction with relationship status on any of our
analyses ( ps ⱖ .19).

TERROR MANAGEMENT AND ATTACHMENT

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

have suggested (e.g., Ainsworth, 1989, 1991; Bowlby, 1982;
Shaver & Mikulincer, 2004), that a variety of different types of
relationships, including parents, close friends, and romantic partners, function in similar ways to provide protection against existential fear. Most people probably use a variety of others for this
purpose. This is not to imply, however, that these relationships are
necessarily interchangeable or that all people use all of these types
of relationships for terror management purposes. The question of
who uses particular types of relationships for existential protection
is an important one that is taken up in Study 6.

STUDIES 4 –5: PARENTS AS TERROR
MANAGEMENT RESOURCES AND THEIR EFFECTS
ON INTERPERSONAL JUDGMENTS
Following the approach of previous terror management research
on the functions of self-esteem and close relationships, in our
second set of studies we focused on the impact of MS on people’s
striving to use their cognitive representations of their parents for
this purpose. Study 4 assessed the effect of MS on participants’
momentary recollections of their mothers, and Study 5 assessed the
effect of MS on people’s evaluation of a novel other who was
described as being similar or dissimilar to a parent.

Study 4
Just as using self-esteem for effective anxiety-buffering requires
that people recruit resources that make them feel good about
themselves (as demonstrated in Study 3), we suspect that using
cognitive representations of parents for these purposes requires
that these representations remain positive. From a TMT perspective, the more favorable the cognitions about a source of security,
the more effective that source becomes as a buffer against existential fear. This need for positive parental representations should
be especially great when one’s need for existential protection is
elevated. Study 4 examined this possibility.
Instead of using the parental visualization exercise as an independent variable as in Studies 1–3, here we used a variant of it as
a dependent variable. After an MS manipulation, participants were
asked to recall a positive, accepting interaction with their mother
and a critical, negative interaction with her. Thus, we hypothesized
that MS would bias people toward positive representations of their
parents, making it easier to recall positive interactions with them
and more difficult to recall negative interactions with them.

Method
Participants
Participants were 24 women and 30 men from introductory
psychology classes at the University of Missouri—Columbia who
participated in exchange for course credit. Ages ranged from 18 to
23 years (M ⫽ 20.03, SD ⫽ 4.35).

Materials and Procedure
Participants completed a packet of materials described as a
personality assessment. All questionnaires were identical except
for the MS manipulation.

705

Mortality salience. Participants completed the same MS (or
dental pain) and delay materials described in Study 1.
Parent evaluation measure. The dependent measure consisted
of two visualization tasks (counterbalanced for order) based on
Baldwin and Sinclair (1996) and those used in Studies 1–3. A
positive scenario asked participants to consider a time when “your
mother expressed a positive opinion” and “was nonevaluative and
accepted you for who you are.” A negative scenario asked participants to think about a time when “your mother held a somewhat
negative opinion of you” and “was very evaluative and accepted
you to the extent that you lived up to certain standards.” Unlike the
previous studies in which participants were asked to write a short
passage, following each scenario, participants rated the clarity of
each visualization (“How easy was it to bring this event to mind?”
and “How clearly were you able to visualize this event?”) by
placing an X on a doted line ranging from not at all to very. The
response range, measured in cm, was from 0 to 16 (see Schimel,
Pyszczynski, Greenberg, O’Mahen, & Arndt, 2000, for similar
procedures). The dependent measure of ease of recall was composed of the mean of these items for the positive (␣ ⫽ .80) and
negative (␣ ⫽ .88) scenarios.

Results and Discussion
A 2 (MS: death vs. dental pain) ⫻ 2 (evaluation: positive vs.
negative) mixed-design ANOVA, with the second factor treated
within subjects, was performed on the ease of recall scores. The
results revealed a significant main effect for evaluation, F(1, 52) ⫽
46.00, p ⬍ .001, d ⫽ 1.00, with participants having an easier time
recalling a positive interaction with their mother (M ⫽ 11.97,
SD ⫽ 3.47) than a negative one (M ⫽ 6.77, SD ⫽ 4.23). The MS
main effect was not significant (F ⬍ 1). The results also revealed
the predicted interaction between MS and evaluation condition,
F(1, 52) ⫽ 8.53, p ⫽ .005, d ⫽ .82 (see Figure 4).9 Simple main
effects analyses within the evaluation conditions revealed a significant difference between death and dental pain conditions for
both positive, F(1, 52) ⫽ 6.10, p ⫽ .02, d ⫽ .68, and negative, F(1,
52) ⫽ 4.30, p ⫽ .04, d ⫽ .53, scores. After being reminded of their
mortality, people had an easier time recalling a positive interaction
with their mother and a more difficult time recalling a negative
interaction with their mother compared to the dental pain condition. Looked at differently, there were significant effects of evaluation condition within the salience conditions: death, F(1, 52) ⫽
45.39, p ⬍ .001, d ⫽ 1.00; dental pain, F(1, 52) ⫽ 7.75, p ⬍ .001,
d ⫽ .78. In both cases, participants had an easier time recalling a
positive interaction with their mother compared to a negative one,
though as shown by the aforementioned comparisons, this effect
was stronger in the MS condition. These effects were not moderated by order of the tasks (Fs ⬍ 1).
Utilizing the parent primes from the previous experiments, we
intended in the present study to examine how reminders of mortality affect the repository of parental images that people can more
easily bring to mind. The present results demonstrate that when
intimations of one’s inevitable death are rendered salient, this leads
9

The presentation order of the visualization tasks did not affect the
results (Fs ⱕ 2.73, ps ⱖ .11).

COX ET AL.

706
18
16

Recall Score

14
12
10

Death
Dental Pain

8
6
4
2
0

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Cell ns =

26

28

26

Positive

28

Negative
Mother Evaluation

Figure 4. Positive and negative mother recall scores as a function of
mortality salience (Study 4). A higher score indicates an easier time
recalling an event. Error bars represent standard deviations for each condition.

to a cognitive orientation that disposes people to more easily recall
positive accepting images of their mother. Such findings, in turn,
provide further insight into the effects documented in the initial
three studies and also suggest further avenues of empirical inquiry.
That participants were more in tune with these positive motherly
images after MS explains in part why the buffering effects were
observed in Studies 1–3; that is, such parental images apparently
reflect a desired source of solace for dealing with concerns about
mortality. Moving forward, these findings also suggest that reminders of death may affect evaluations of and interactions with
others who share important characteristics with one’s parents.
Study 5 was designed to provide more direct insight into this
possibility.

Study 5
The idea that ideation about early relationships with one’s
parents may resurface in later relationships with others is common
to a wide variety of psychological theories (e.g., attachment theory, Bowlby, 1982; objects relations theory, Winnicott, 1960;
social learning theory, Bandura, 1977; Sullivan, 1953; attraction–
similarity; Byrne, 1971). Of interest, the concept of transference,
as originally proposed by Freud (1912/1958), refers to the phenomenon whereby aspects of past relationships with significant
individuals resurface in and influence current interpersonal relations. More recently, Andersen and colleagues (e.g., Andersen &
Baum 1994; Chen & Andersen, 1999) have applied these ideas to
interpersonal relationships and have developed methods for studying transference in the laboratory. According to Chen and
Andersen (1999), when something about a new person reminds the
perceiver of a significant other, the stored representations of the
significant individual are readily accessible, either consciously or
unconsciously and, in turn, are applied to the new person, thereby
influencing the perceiver’s interpretations of and responses toward
the new person.

In his analysis of what he referred to as “the spell cast by
persons,” Becker (1973) built on Freud’s concept of transference
and argued that other transference relationships play an important
role in providing psychological protection against the awareness of
death. He proposed that part of the reason people idealize meaningful others, including loved ones, leaders, and cult figures, is that
they seek to use the power of others to protect them from existential fear. This implies that transference may be especially likely to
occur when the problem of death is salient.
Building on the work of Andersen and her colleagues (e.g.,
Andersen & Baum 1994; Chen & Andersen, 1999), in the present
study we examined reactions to a potential interaction partner as a
function of MS and positive characteristics shared with a significant other, specifically, one’s opposite-gender parent. After being
reminded of death (or not), participants were provided with a
personality profile from an unknown partner with positive characteristics similar to either their own opposite-gender parent or
someone else’s parent. Our primary reason for choosing the
opposite-gender parent was simply to hold that variable constant.
However, we also thought that this would be a good choice
because it has sometimes been suggested that people tend to be
attracted to members of the opposite sex with characteristics
similar to their opposite-gender parent (Freud, 1927; Geher, 2000;
Little, Penton-Voak, Burt, & Perrett, 2003; Little & Perrett, 2002).
We chose to examine the effect of shared positive characteristics
because both attachment theory and the present Studies 1 and 4
show that it is positive parental representations that provide security and a buffer against death-related fear. Two primary dependent
measures were assessed. First, we examined the participants’ attitudinal evaluation of their potential partner. Second, we obtained a
behavioral measure of physical proximity seeking by using a
variant of the seating paradigm developed by Macrae and colleagues (Macrae, Bodenhausen, Milne, & Jetten, 1994). To the
extent transference is especially likely to influence evaluations of
others when existential threat is elevated, we hypothesized that MS
would lead people to evaluate a target person who resembled their
parent more positively and to sit closer to that person in an
anticipated interaction task.

Method
Participants
Seventy-five participants (49 women and 26 men) from the
University of Missouri—Columbia participated in exchange for
course credit for their introductory psychology classes. Ages
ranged from 18 to 22 years (M ⫽ 18.70, SD ⫽ 0.89).

Materials and Procedure
The experiment took place over two different time periods.
Participants signed up for each study separately, and the studies
were conducted at different locations on campus. The content and
order of the materials for each session are described below.
Session 1: Generating significant-other characteristics. Participants completed a questionnaire packet described as a personality and relationship assessment in a classroom setting. To obtain
the characteristics for the second phase of the experiment, we

TERROR MANAGEMENT AND ATTACHMENT

asked participants to provide information about their mothers and
fathers. The actual purpose of this exercise was of course not
revealed at the initial session. Following Andersen and Baum
(1994), we told participants,

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Take a moment to think about your mother. Consider characteristics
that you feel uniquely describe your mother and distinguish her from
other people (i.e., think about what stands out about your mother in
your mind). Next, we want you to generate seven sentences that
describe your mother.

Participants were also asked to think about and generate a parallel
set of sentences about their father. After listing these characteristics, they were asked to rank order each list in terms of their
importance for distinguishing each parent from other people. The
rank-ordered items were used to construct target descriptions for
the partner evaluation task described in Session 2 (following
Andersen & Baum, 1994, we selected items ranked 4 –7 for the
task). In addition to general trait characteristics, participants provided demographic information about both parents including age,
date of birth, and general hobbies–interests; in addition, as in
Andersen and Baum (1994), they were asked to evaluate 42
experimenter provided adjectives for each parent in order to get a
reasonable number of irrelevant characteristics for the person
perception task described in Session 2. At the end of the session,
participants were asked to provide demographic information about
themselves, including their age and gender.
Session 2: Person perception. The actual experiment was conducted in a person perception study that was held at least 2 weeks
after the initial session by a different experimenter. This phase of
the experiment was conducted in individual sessions in a laboratory setting. These precautions (i.e., different experimenter, individual testing in a lab setting) were included to reduce the connection between the two sessions. Participants were told that the
second study was interested in how people form first impressions
about one another. The experimenter (who was blind to conditions)
explained that the study involved filling out a couple of questionnaires and doing a task with a partner in another room (i.e., briefly
talking with another student about a topic chosen at random, e.g.,
being in college). Participants were randomly assigned to complete
one of two different questionnaire packets. The only difference
between the packets was the MS manipulation.
Personality profile. Participants were asked to complete a
personality profile as part of the cover story for the experiment,
and participants were told that they would be exchanging this
information with their partner prior to the interaction task. The
personality profile asked participants to answer a series of questions, including their birthday, major, interests– hobbies, and a few
words to describe themselves.
Mortality salience. Participants completed the same MS–
dental pain and delay materials described in the previous studies.
Partner evaluation. Participants were given a personality profile
describing their fictitious partner in the next room. Half of the participants received a profile that resembled their own parent (women
received a profile with characteristics that resembled their father, men
received a profile with characteristics that resembled their mother) or
someone else’s parent. In the own parent condition, the participant’s
partner had the same birthday as his or her parent (i.e., the month and
day but not year), participated in similar hobbies (i.e., two of the four

707

hobbies listed were similar to ones generated by participants in Session 1 to describe their parents), and read a series of characteristics
used to describe the target person. As previously mentioned, these
included the items ranked 4 –7 on their forms from Session 1. The
remaining three characteristics were obtained from experimentersupplied adjectives also collected at Session 1. In light of previous
work that finds that people are able to discern a writer’s sex with
better-than-chance accuracy (Hayes, 1996; Sappington & Money,
2003), the partner’s ostensible handwriting was designed to be consistent with the sex of the participant’s opposite-gender parent. Participants were randomly assigned to conditions prior to their participation, and separate experimenters were used to generate the
personality profiles.
Participants were then asked to evaluate their partner with the
assurance that their partners would not have access to their evaluations. The dependent measure consisted of 12 items with scales
ranging from not at all to totally, including, “How much do you
think that you would like this person?” “In general, how positive
is your impression of this person?” “How comfortable do you
think you would feel interacting with this person?” and “How
much are you looking forward to completing the task with your
partner?” Similar to Study 4, responses were measured with a
ruler. The possible range of scores was 1 to 16. We calculated
partner evaluation scores by taking the mean response across all 12
items (␣ ⫽ .91).
Distancing task. Once participants finished their partner evaluations, the experimenter directed the participants into another
room to complete the interaction task with their partner. This room
was much larger than the previous lab space, and the room was
completely empty except for two folding chairs left leaning against
a wall. The experimenter informed the participant that she was
going to check on his or her partner and asked the participant to set
up the folding chairs for the task. When the experimenter returned,
the participant was told that his or her partner was not ready and
was asked to return to their original lab room to complete additional questionnaire forms. Once the participant had left the room,
the experiment measured the distance (in inches) between the two
chairs (see Macrae et al., 1994, for similar procedures).
Manipulation checks. Participants completed two manipulation checks as part of the second questionnaire packet. First, to
make sure that participants read their partner’s personality profile,
we asked them to list four things that they remembered about their
partner. Next, to determine whether their partner reminded them of
their parent, we asked three questions, “Does your partner remind
you of someone that you know?” “To what extent does this person
remind you of your mother?” and “To what extent does this person
remind you of your father?” Responses were indicated on a 9-point
scale ranging from 1 (not at all) to 9 (totally). These questions
were analyzed separately for the manipulation check.
At the end of the study, participants were extensively debriefed
and probed about the nature of study and whether they saw any
connection between the two separate sessions.

Results and Discussion
Manipulation Check
Participants recalled, on average, 2.7 items from their partners’
profile, suggesting that they did indeed read the profile. Analysis

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

COX ET AL.

of recall revealed no significant main or interaction effects (Fs ⱕ
1.02, ps ⱖ .32). A 2 (MS: death vs. dental pain) x 2 (target profile:
own parent vs. other parent) between-subjects ANOVA on participants’ similarity ratings for the target person (i.e., “Does your
partner remind you of someone who you know?”) revealed that no
main or interaction effects were significant, Fs(1, 68) ⱕ 2.13, ps ⱖ
.15. Since participants were presented with characteristics based
on the gender of their parents (i.e., women received their father’s
characteristics, men received their mother’s characteristics), separate analyses were performed on the remaining two items (“To
what extent does this person remind you of your mother–father?”).
For women, the ANOVA revealed a significant effect for profile,
F(1, 43) ⫽ 23.23, p ⬍ .001, d ⫽ 1.00, with people receiving their
father’s characteristics stating the person resembled their father
(M ⫽ 5.04, SD ⫽ 2.23) more than those who received someone
else’s father characteristics (M ⫽ 2.42, SD ⫽ 1.47). Neither the
main effect of MS nor the interaction between MS and parent
profile was significant, Fs(1, 43) ⱕ 1.29, ps ⱖ .26. Similarly, for
men, there was a main effect for profile, F(1, 21) ⫽ 7.02, p ⫽ .02,
d ⫽ .72, but no other effects (Fs ⬍ 1). Examination of the means
showed that men who received their mother’s characteristics (M ⫽
5.30, SD ⫽ 1.70) rated the target as reminding them more of their
mother compared to those who received another person’s mother
descriptions (M ⫽ 3.33, SD ⫽ 1.91). Taken together, theses results
suggest that the transference manipulation was successful.

Partner Evaluation
To test the hypothesis that people evaluate a target person who
is similar to a parent more positively following reminders of death,
we conducted a 2 (MS: death vs. dental pain) ⫻ 2 (target profile:
own parent vs. other parent) between-subjects ANOVA on mean
partner evaluation scores. The results showed a significant main
effect for profile, F(1, 69) ⫽ 4.19, p ⫽ .04, d ⫽ .52, but not death,
F(1, 69) ⫽ 2.58, p ⫽ .11. People who received the parent-like
characteristics (M ⫽ 9.64, SD ⫽ 2.16) evaluated the target person
more positively compared to people who received the non-parentlike characteristics (M ⫽ 8.76, SD ⫽ 1.96). However, this effect
was qualified by the predicted two-way interaction between MS
and profile conditions, F(1, 69) ⫽ 3.87, p ⫽ .05, d ⫽ .49 (see
Figure 5). Simple main effect analyses revealed that when a target
person held characteristics similar to the participants’ parents,
people primed with thoughts of death rated the target person more
positively compared to the dental pain condition, F(1, 69) ⫽ 5.99,
p ⫽ .02, d ⫽ .68. In the non-parent-like condition, there was no
difference between the MS and dental pain conditions (F ⬍ 1).
Looked at differently, the results also revealed an effect of profile
within the death condition, F(1, 69) ⫽ 8.04, p ⫽ .006, d ⫽ .80, but
not the dental pain condition (F ⬍ 1). Following MS, participants
rated the target person more positively when this person had
parent-like characteristics compared to someone who did not.

Interpersonal Distance
A 2 (MS: death vs. dental pain) x 2 (target profile: own parent
vs. other parent) between-subjects ANOVA on the distance between own and other’s chair showed the predicted MS ⫻ Profile
interaction, F(1, 70) ⫽ 4.68, p ⫽ .03, d ⫽ .64, but no main effects

16
14
Partner Evaluation

708

12
10
Death

8

Dental Pain

6
4
2
0

Cell ns =

15

19

Own Parent

22

17

Other Parent
Partner Profile

Figure 5. Partner evaluation scores as a function of mortality salience and
partner profile (own vs. other parent; Study 5). A higher score indicates
more positive partner evaluations. Error bars represent standard deviations
for each condition.

(Fs ⬍ 1; see Figure 6). Simple main effect tests revealed a
significant effect of MS within the parent-like condition, F(1,
70) ⫽ 4.72, p ⫽ .03, d ⫽ .57, with people in the death condition
moving the chairs closer together than the dental pain condition.
There was no significant difference between death and dental pain
conditions within the non-parent-like condition (F ⬍ 1). The
results also showed a significant effect of profile within the death,
F(1, 70) ⫽ 9.81, p ⫽ .003, d ⫽ .87, but not dental pain (F ⬍ 1)
condition. Following MS, participants who received parent-like
descriptions moved the chairs closer together compared to those
who received non-parent-like descriptions.
Study 5 demonstrated that MS increased attraction and physical
proximity to a novel person who shared positive characteristics
with the participants’ opposite-gender parent. Because the effect of
MS did not extend to a control other who resembled another
person’s parent, it cannot be interpreted as a general increase in
positivity of evaluations or proximity seeking brought on by the
death reminder. Because this preference for others who resemble
one’s parent did not emerge in the absence of MS, this result
cannot be attributed to a general positivity effect of people viewing
the characteristics of their parents as especially desirable. Rather,
these results suggest that, as hypothesized, reminders of death
increase the appeal of others who resemble one’s parents. Thus,
transference reactions to those who share positive features with
one’s parents appear to be especially likely when one’s need for
existential protection is elevated. Presumably such others are especially attractive under conditions of MS because their similarity
to one’s primary attachment figures implies, probably at an unconscious experiential level, that they will be comforting and
esteem enhancing and thus useful for terror management purposes.
Unlike the findings of Andersen and colleagues (e.g., Andersen
& Baum, 1994), Study 5 did not find any hint of an effect of
similarity to parent in the absence of MS. Given Andersen et al.’s
(e.g., Andersen & Baum, 1994) previous findings of transference

TERROR MANAGEMENT AND ATTACHMENT
50
45
40
Chair Distance

35
30
Death
Dental Pain

25
20
15
10
5

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

0
Cell ns =

17

18

Own Parent

22

17

Other Parent
Partner Profile

Figure 6. Chair distancing scores (in inches) as a function of mortality
salience and partner profile (own vs. other parent; Study 5). A higher score
reflects a greater distance between chairs. Error bars represent standard
deviations for each condition.

effects in the absence of MS, it is obvious that MS is not a
prerequisite for such effects to occur. We suspect that the similarity between parent and novel other in the present study may have
been more subtle than that in these previous studies. For example,
in Andersen’s work on transference (see, e.g., Andersen & Baum,
1994), partner characteristics are presented one at a time on an
index card and participants are asked to memorize each trait for a
memory test at the end of the study. Conversely, in the present
study participants were simply asked to read a short personality
profile about the target person. Although our participants did rate
the transference target person as more similar to their parents than
the control target person, they did not differentiate between target
persons on the more subtle item asking if this person “reminds you
of someone you know.” In contrast, Andersen et al. (Andersen &
Baum, 1994; Hinkley & Andersen, 1996) did find differences on
measures similar to this item. This suggests that although transference processes may affect evaluations of those who are highly
similar to important others in one’s life on a relatively routine and
regular basis, heightened motivation may be necessary for transference effects to occur when the level of similarity between the
novel other and transference object is relatively subtle.
The present finding that transference effects are increased when
mortality is salient are consistent with the ideas of Freud (1958)
and others (e.g., Becker, 1973; Sullivan, 1953; Winnicott, 1960)
who posit that transference is often used to serve pressing and
largely unconscious psychological needs. It is also generally consistent with theories that posit that romantic attraction to those who
resemble one’s opposite-gender parent is driven by needs for
psychological security (e.g., Freud, 1912/1958). And perhaps most
relevant for present purposes, these findings support the attachment theory proposition (e.g., Bowlby, 1982; Brumbaugh & Fraley, 2006; Hazan & Shaver, 1987) that attraction to those who are
similar to attachment figures is driven by the security and potential
for a safe haven that such others provide.

709

The findings of Study 5 also raise some important questions
worthy of additional research. Are these effects specific to reactions to members of the opposite sex who are similar to one’s
opposite sex parent? Previous theorists from Freud on (e.g., Daly
& Wilson, 1990; Geher, 2000; Little et al., 2003) have speculated
about a possible romantic preference for those who share features
with one’s opposite-gender parents, and the present study demonstrates that MS increases attraction to such others. The question of
whether this effect would generalize to others who are similar to
same-sex parents is an important one, but because it is not directly
pertinent to the theoretical ideas the present set of studies was
designed to test, it is not pursued further here.
Second, because the current study only used positive trait adjectives to describe the target person, it is unclear what effect MS
would have on evaluations of those who share negative characteristics with one’s parents. Andersen and Baum (1994) found a
significant transference effect (evaluating a novel other who resembles an important person from one’s past in a way that reflects
one’s feelings about the past other) regardless of whether the
similarity was on positive or negative features. This suggests that
the transference probably operates on both positive and negative
dimensions. However, because our interest here was in MSinduced attraction to those who resemble attachment figures, and
because Studies 1 and 4 demonstrate that only positive attachment
representations are useful for terror management purposes, this
question is beyond the scope of the present work and is not
explored further here. Still, how people relate to others who share
negative characteristics with attachment figures is an important
and intriguing issue for future research on motivated transference
processes.

STUDY 6: THE EFFECT OF INDIVIDUAL
DIFFERENCES IN ATTACHMENT STYLE
Study 6
Studies 1–5 provide converging evidence that parental attachment can play an important role in terror management processes.
However, in Studies 2 and 3, both parental primes and close friend
or romantic partner primes were found to mitigate the consequences of MS. This leads to the question of how parental attachment relates to other types of attachments and what leads a person
to preferentially rely on one or the other type of attachment when
his or her need for security is heightened. Although all attachment
theories posit that the initial bond with one’s parents or primary
caregivers forms the basis on which later relationships are
founded, the present studies are the first to document the continued
use of these primary attachment relationships to control existential
anxiety in adult life. But given that young adults have now been
shown to use their romantic partners, close friends, and parents as
bulwarks against death-related anxiety, questions about the determinants of which others are selected for such protection must be
addressed. As an initial step in this direction, Study 6 explored the
role of attachment security in producing such preferences.
To our knowledge, this is the first study to explore relative
preferences for different attachment figures in response to threat.
After a copious literature search, we could find no studies that
compared preferences for the solace of different relationship types

COX ET AL.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

710

as a function of an individuals’ attachment style. Addressing this
question poses a methodological challenge: How to assess participants’ relationship preferences among a number of simultaneously available options. To this end, we created a purported
marketing survey wherein participants were asked to allocate minutes on a cell phone calling plan to each of four different relationship persons (i.e., parent, sibling, romantic partner, close friend).
Following previous TMT research (Mikulincer & Florian, 2000),
we hypothesized that low levels of attachment anxiety and avoidance (attachment security) would predict increased preference for
close relationships with romantic partners. Conversely, after MS,
insecurely attached individuals should report increased preference
for a parent. However, we predicted that this effect would be
specific to those with high levels of attachment anxiety and low
levels of attachment avoidance, since previous research has found
that such individuals have problems transferring attachment functions from parents to subsequent relationships (e.g., Allen & Land,
1999; Mayseless, 2004). Highly avoidant individuals seem not to
value attachments generally (Fraley, Davis, & Shaver, 1998), so
we doubted whether they would rely on parents or any other
attachment figures after MS.

Method
Participants
Participants were 100 students (56 women, 44 men) recruited
from introductory psychology classes at the University of Missouri—Columbia in exchange for partial course credit. Ages
ranged from 18 to 26 years (M ⫽ 19.07, SD ⫽ 1.33).

Materials and Procedure
The study was conducted in a laboratory setting. All packets
were identical in content except for the MS manipulation.
Attachment. Participants completed Griffin and Bartholomew’s (1994b) 30-item Relationship Scales Questionnaire as
part of a mass screening session approximately 2 weeks prior to
their participation in the study. Previous research attests to the
scale’s reliability and validity (e.g., Griffin & Bartholomew,
1994a, 1994b; Kurdek, 2002). Given the present interest in preferences among different relationships, one advantage of this particular scale is that it measures general attachment styles as opposed to those tied to a specific type of (e.g., romantic)
relationship. Items were presented on a 5-point scale ranging from
1 (not at all like me) to 5 (very like me). Since most researchers
currently suggest that attachment should be measured in relation to
two distinct attachment dimensions (see, e.g., Fraley & Waller,
1998), we calculated separate anxiety (e.g., “I worry about being
abandoned”; ␣ ⫽ .81) and avoidant (e.g., “I find it difficult to trust
others completely”; ␣ ⫽ .72) scores following procedures recommended by Kurdek (2002; see also Simpson, Rholes, & Nelligan,
1992).
MS manipulation. Following filler measures to maintain the
cover story, participants completed the same MS– dental pain
manipulation and delay tasks described previously.
Cell phone task. The dependent measure was a cell phone
minute allocation task that we created to assess preference for

various relationships. Specifically, participants were presented
with a questionnaire described as a “Consumer Behavior and
Marketing Survey.” To maintain the cover story for the task, we
told participants,
Recent evidence suggests that observing people’s attitudes and behaviors toward certain products can be very informative. By having a
fuller sense of how people use a product, researchers gain important
insight into how people make decisions and what they look for.

The instructions further stated that everyone was randomly assigned to evaluate a common, everyday household product; actually, all participants completed the same cell phone calling plan
evaluation. The instructions read,
Imagine you are given a cell phone with 100 minutes allotted to you
per week. These are whenever minutes, so you can call anyone at
anytime without additional fees or penalties; however, you must
partition these minutes in advance. In the space below, indicate how
you would partition (or breakdown) your 100 minutes. That is, please
indicate how many minutes that you would use to call each of the
following people. Keep in mind that your total time should add up to
100 minutes.

Following the instructions, participants were presented with four
relationships: parent, sibling, romantic partner, and a close friend.
A blank space was placed next to each relationship, and participants were asked to indicate the number of minutes they would use
to call each person. We counterbalanced the presentation order of
relationships to control for order effects. The dependent measure
consisted of the number of minutes allocated to each of the four
relationships.

Results and Discussion
Separate regression analyses were performed on minutes allocated to each relationship (parent, romantic partner, sibling, and
close friend). For each analysis, MS (dummy coded) and attachment anxiety and avoidance (centered) were entered simultaneously as predictors in the first step, followed by all two-way
interactions in the second step, and the three-way interaction in the
third step (Aiken & West, 1991). To ensure participant’s relationship status did not affect the results, we included the amount of
time in a romantic relationship (centered) as a covariate (entering
zero for people not in a romantic relationship).
Whereas there were no effects for time allocated to a close
friend or sibling (both ps ⱖ .21), there was an Avoidance ⫻
Anxiety ⫻ MS interaction on people’s time allocations to a romantic partner (b ⫽ –16.58, SE ⫽ 7.17, t ⫽ –2.31, p ⫽ .02, R2 ⫽
.18. In order to examine simple slopes, we needed to split the data;
thus, we inspected the two-way interaction between MS and anxiety among those above and below the median on avoidance. There
were no significant effects among high-avoidant individuals ( ps ⱖ
.34). However, there was an interaction between MS and anxiety
among low-avoidant individuals (b ⫽ 34.76, SE ⫽ 9.94, t ⫽ 3.50,
p ⫽ .001, R2 ⫽ .22; Figure 7). Simple slope tests (Rosenthal &
Rosnow, 1985) revealed that, after MS, lower attachment anxiety
predicted higher time allocations to a romantic partner (b ⫽
–27.54, SE ⫽ 8.46, t ⫽ –3.25, p ⫽ .002). No such relationship was
present in the dental pain condition ( p ⫽ .17).

TERROR MANAGEMENT AND ATTACHMENT

Partner Preference

80
60
40

Death
Dental Pain

20
0
-20
-40
(-2SD)

(-1SD)

0

(+1SD)

(+2SD)

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Attachment Anxiety (Centered)

Figure 7. Cell phone minutes allocated to a romantic partner as a function
of mortality salience and anxiety among low-avoidant individuals (Study
6).

To further elucidate this interaction, we examined the effects of
MS (vs. dental pain) at ⫾1 SD above and below the mean on
continuous attachment anxiety and avoidance scores (cf. Aiken &
West, 1991). At high levels of attachment anxiety and low levels
of attachment avoidance, reminders of death led to fewer minutes
allocated to a romantic partner than did reminders of dental pain
(b ⫽ 50.47, SE ⫽ 22.40, t ⫽ 2.25, p ⫽ .03). As expected, at low
levels of anxious and avoidant attachment, however, MS increased
the amount of time allotted to a romantic partner relative to the
dental pain condition (b ⫽ –16.38, SE ⫽ 6.83), t ⫽ –2.40, p ⫽
.02).
There was also an MS, anxiety, and avoidance interaction on
parent time allocations (b ⫽ 15.42, SE ⫽ 5.66, t ⫽ 2.73, p ⫽ .01,
R2 ⫽ .15. The Death ⫻ Anxiety interaction was examined for
those scoring above and below the median on avoidance, and the
result revealed no significant effects among high-avoidant individuals ( ps ⱖ .65). However, among low-avoidant individuals, the
results revealed an MS ⫻ Anxiety interaction (b ⫽ –28.62, SE ⫽
7.07, t ⫽ – 4.05, p ⬍ .001, R2 ⫽ .32; Figure 8). Simple slope tests
revealed that, after MS, higher attachment anxiety predicted more
time being allocated to a parent (b ⫽ 26.71, SE ⫽ 6.02, t ⫽ 4.44,
p ⬍ .001). There was no linear relationship in the dental pain
condition ( p ⫽ .61).
We again examined the effects of MS at 1 SD above and below
the mean on attachment anxiety and attachment avoidance (both
continuous). At high levels of attachment anxiety and low levels of
attachment avoidance, MS participants allocated significantly
more time to a parent than did their dental pain condition counterparts (b ⫽ –32.04, SE ⫽ 14.47, t ⫽ –2.22, p ⫽ .03).
Experiment 6 provides initial evidence of the role of attachment
style in determining which of several potential attachment figures
one is most interested in interacting with after being reminded of
their mortality. Specifically, those scoring low on attachment
anxiety and avoidance (i.e., secure individuals) reported increased
relative preference for a romantic partner (as measured by the
amount of cell phone time allocated to this person) after MS than
a control condition. In contrast, for those scoring low on avoidance
and high on anxiety (i.e., highly anxious persons), MS led to an
increased relative preference for a parent. Finally, there was no

significant relationship between MS and anxiety for those scoring
high on attachment avoidance.
To our knowledge, this is the first study to investigate how a
person’s attachment style influences the preference for different
attachment relationships in response to threat. In so doing, the
study replicates, reconciles, and extends the previous studies reported here as well as in the prior work of Mikulincer and Florian
(2000). Whereas Mikulincer and Florian found that MS increased
a desire for romantic relationship intimacy primarily among securely attached individuals, the present study replicates that finding but also shows that MS increased relational striving toward
one’s parents among anxious individuals (i.e., people scoring high
on attachment anxiety, low on attachment avoidance). By using a
dependent measure that allowed participants to evaluate different
relationships, we were able to see that the preferred object of
relational strivings after MS differ in theoretically meaningful
ways as a function of an individual’s preexisting levels of attachment anxiety and avoidance.
One area of ambiguity concerns the responses of those scoring
low on both attachment anxiety and attachment avoidance (i.e.,
secure individuals). In this study, there was no effect of MS for
such individuals on the amount of time allocated to a parent. In
Studies 1–5, however, we found that parental representations generally served an anxiety-buffering function following reminders of
death. One possible explanation for this apparent inconsistency is
that the lower preference for parents in Study 6 could have been
caused by secure individuals’ higher preference for romantic partners. Indeed, secure individuals on average allocated 79.45 of their
100 minutes to a romantic partner, leaving very few minutes to
allocate to the other relationships (i.e., a parent, sibling, and/or
close friend). In light of previous research that has found that
secure persons react to MS with a heightened desire for close
relationships (Mikulincer & Florian, 2000), it makes sense that
they would express an increased relative preference for a romantic
partner over a parent when given the opportunity to do so. Although the current study provides the first step in examining
people’s preferences for relationships as a function of MS and
attachment style differences, future research should continue to
examine when, where, under what circumstances, and for whom
such preferences are more likely to occur.

100
80
Parent Preferenc

100

711

60
Death
Dental Pain

40
20
0
-20
(-2SD)

(-1SD)

0

(+1SD)

(+2SD)

Attachment Anxiety (Centered)

Figure 8. Cell phone minutes allocated to a parent as a function of
mortality salience and anxiety among low-avoidant individuals (Study 6).

COX ET AL.

712

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

GENERAL DISCUSSION
TMT has long posited that the capacity for self-esteem and
cultural worldviews to protect people from fears about death
develops out of the security provided by early attachment relationships. Although research has examined the role that close romantic
relationships (e.g., Mikulincer & Florian, 2000) and other social
identifications (e.g., Arndt, Greenberg, Schimel, Pyszczynski, &
Solomon, 2002; Castano, 2004; Pyszczynski et al., 1996) play in
terror management processes, questions about whether one’s more
rudimentary attachment to one’s parents continue to provide protection against mortality concerns into young adulthood have not
yet been empirically examined. The present series of studies addressed these questions.

Summary of the Main Findings
In the present work, we followed diverse strategies used in
previous terror management research to uncover the psychological
protection afforded by parental attachments. Specifically, the first
series of studies tested whether parents serve an anxiety-buffering
function. Study 1 showed that visualizing a positive interaction
with a parent eliminated the delayed increase in death-thought
accessibility otherwise produced by a reminder of one’s mortality.
Study 2 showed that visualizing an interaction with a parent or a
close friend eliminated the oft-replicated effect of MS on worldview defense. Study 3 revealed that combining MS and parent or
romantic relationship primes led to increased feelings of selfworth. These studies thus attest to the capacity for parental representations to buffer the consequences of thoughts of death.
The second series of studies examined specific ways in which
people use their parents as a resource for managing mortality
concerns. From a TMT perspective, the more favorable the evaluation of a source of security, the more effective that source
becomes as a buffer against existential fear. In Study 4, MS
increased the ease with which individuals were able to recall
positive interactions with their mother and the difficulty they had
recalling negative interactions with her. Study 5 demonstrated that
MS led to increased (behavioral and evaluative) attraction to a
stranger who was similar to one’s opposite-gender parent but had
no effect on reactions to a positively described stranger who was
not similar to one’s parent.
Finally, Study 6 explored how variations in attachment style
influence people’s reactions toward different personal relationships following MS. This study found that intimations of mortality
motivated anxious individuals to show increased relative preference for a parent, whereas secure individuals showed increased
preference for romantic partners. Taken together, the results of six
studies, using markedly different approaches, suggest that adult
offspring continue to use internal representations of their parents
as a means of coping with the inevitability of death.
From the perspective of attachment theory (Bowlby, 1982),
close relationships are important because they are an effective
means for dealing with basic anxieties and as a resource for
adjustment. The present findings converge with previous research
(see, e.g., Mikulincer et al., 2003) to extend these formulations to
the existential fear of death. It seems that close relationships not
only protect individuals from real or actual threats but also provide

a symbolic shield against reminders of one’s finitude. As the
current research demonstrates, following MS, people are motivated to strengthen their relationship with a parent, who, in turn,
may help them manage and diffuse the sense of threat. However,
unlike most other threats, the threat of one’s mortality is inescapable, and support from others cannot remove the threat entirely,
though it can provide some comfort. That is, mere thoughts of
failure (Study 3), pain (Studies 1, 4, 5, and 6), and loss of a limb
(Study 2) can be easily dismissed because they can be viewed as
unlikely to happen or experiences that people can move past,
whereas thoughts of one’s mortality cannot be easily dismissed
and death is not so surmountable. Therefore, whereas a number of
aversive experiences when relevant are likely to activate the attachment system, the mere thought of them may not do so to the
same extent as thoughts of death. In addition, in some of the
present work (e.g., Studies 1–2), the control condition was not
expected to elicit any defensive responses (e.g., worldview defense), and thus there was nothing for the activation of the attachment system to mitigate.

Issues With the Intersection Between Terror Management
and Attachment
Although this work provides insight into the role of parental
attachment in terror management, there are some remaining issues
that should be noted. Although the present studies examined the
role that parents play in buffering concerns about death, there are
theoretical and empirical reasons to believe that attachment style
would interact with MS to influence the findings (Studies 1–5). For
example, one would expect individual differences in the ease with
which people are able to recall positive interactions with their
mothers, as well as the positivity of the interaction, and the
vividness of the memory. Although we did not examine
attachment-style differences in all of the studies, we feel that the
current research is important because it integrates the normative
(Studies 1–5) and intraindividual (Study 6) aspects of attachment.
Hundreds of studies have documented the role of attachment in
adulthood, focusing primarily on the domain of individual differences. The primary focus here was on the general role of parental
attachment in coping with the threat of mortality. Still, Study 6 did
support a moderating role of attachment style, suggesting that
when given choices, securely attached people tend to rely on
romantic partners, whereas anxious but not avoidant people tend to
rely on parents.
Further, whereas Studies 1 and 4 focused on perhaps the more
basic maternal relationship, fathers can also serve as a source of
meaning and security. Although Studies 2, 3, 5, and 6 explored
people’s reactions to parent in place of one’s mother, we cannot
confidently generalize all of the results to both parents. However,
in Studies 2 and 3, we coded the relationship primes for whether
people wrote about their mother or father and found that the gender
of the parent did not affect the results. Future research should
continue to explore when and how people use their fathers, in
addition to their mothers, as a source of solace and protection
against existential anxieties. Indeed, for certain individuals, fathers
may have a more potent influence on attachment processes and
psychological security (Shaver, Belsky, & Brennan, 2000).

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

TERROR MANAGEMENT AND ATTACHMENT

This distinction between parental attachments may be seen as
part of a larger issue of how primary attachment fits into the matrix
of young adults’ social networks. Studies have shown that under
certain conditions, after reminders of mortality, people will seek
generalized social affiliation (Wisman & Koole, 2003), attitudinal
consensus with larger nationalistic groups (e.g., Pyszczynski et al.,
1996), commitment to romantic relationships (Florian et al., 2002),
and, now, parental attachment as well. However, what has yet to be
explored are the conditions under which people seek the security
of particular attachment representations over others. Study 6 provides an initial answer to this question, demonstrating that choice
among relationships in response to threat depends on preexisting
attachment styles, with securely attached persons showing increased preference for romantic partners, anxiously attached persons showing increased preference for parents, and avoidantly
attached persons not showing any increased desire for contact with
these persons or their siblings or close friends in response to MS.
Although Study 6 provides an important first step toward exploring the determinants of preferences among different attachment
figures in response to existential threat, more research is needed to
explore the determinants of such relationship hierarchies and preferences.
One can adopt an even broader vantage point and conceptualize
attachment as one form of existential protection within a larger
security system. In accord with this view, Hart et al. (2005)
provided evidence of compensatory responses among attachment,
self-esteem, and worldview defense mechanisms. The relative
preference for utilizing these different resources, however, remains
to be investigated. While there may indeed be a tripartite security
system, it is likely that as people navigate through life, they prefer
to use certain resources over others. Such preferences might vary
depending not only on dispositional factors such as attachment
style but situational factors as well. For example, one question is
whether some types of threats may be more prone to elicit relational striving, whereas other threats may be more prone to elicit
self-esteem or worldview relevant responses (Arndt, Greenberg, &
Cook, 2002). Further, even within a type of threat, contextual
factors may render a particular domain more appealing than others.
Overall, in light of the results of Study 3 and that of other research
(e.g., Hart et al., 2005), more research is needed into the mechanism by which attachment buffers mortality concerns.
The present analysis also provides a foundation from which to
consider how the intersection between terror management and
attachment relate to lifespan development. Attachment has been
much studied as a theoretical concept explaining a child’s relational ties to his or her parents or caregivers; however, there have
been relatively few empirical studies of attachment processes in
adult children’s relationships and their aging parents (however, see
Cicirelli, 1991), as well as the processes that unfold once the tables
are turned and the child has children of his or her own. In regard
to the former, one possibility is that given the increased vulnerability of parents to illness with increasing age, parents may indeed
be more problematic and perceived less as attachment figures for
their older children. Although Study 1 found that parents served an
anxiety-buffering function for their adult children regardless of age
(i.e., participants ranged in age between 17 and 54 years), we were
unable to determine whether parents served the attachment needs
(as assessed on the WHOTO) of our participants despite age

713

differences. A second possibility is that watching one’s parents
grow old and approach death might actually increase the salience
of one’s mortality. Martens, Greenberg, Schimel, and Landau
(2004) can be seen as consistent with this view. In this research,
similar to reactions to disabled persons observed by Hirschberger,
Florian, and Mikulincer (2005), exposure to elderly persons increased death thought accessibility among younger individuals,
and reminding younger adults of their mortality resulted in distancing from and derogation of elderly people.
Of course, there may be important differences between typical
elderly persons and one’s parents in terms of their capacity to
stimulate thoughts of personal mortality and associated existential
dynamics. Perhaps because of the existential protection they provide, in many cases people seem reticent to accept their parents’
aging and increasing vulnerability to mortality. And when such
revelations are made, do they also prompt concerns with personal
mortality and its consequent defensive reactions? It is worth noting
that, while not focused on one’s parents per se, Greenberg et al.
(1994) found that thoughts of the death of a loved one did not elicit
as strong an effect on worldview defense as thinking about one’s
own mortality. Nonetheless, by drawing attention to existential
issues and parental attachment, the present studies invite further
inquiry into the conditions under which (and the interaction between) parents’ capacity to serve as anxiety buffers and reminders
of the transience of life across the lifespan.
Just as there are important questions to consider when people
approach the end of life, so too are there critical questions about
the juxtaposition of terror management and attachment as new life
begins. Research is needed to explore the existential and attachment dynamics that emerge when children become parents. Wisman and Goldenberg (2005) found that reminders of mortality can
increase the desire for offspring, as long as the desire for offspring
was not seen by participants as inconsistent with pursuing career
choices that might garner prestige and self-esteem. This finding
invites consideration of how people juggle the different motives
that reminders of death can provoke. The integration of attachment
style into this topic (e.g., Rholes, Simpson, & Friedman, 2006), in
turn, may help to elucidate how people prioritize different terror
management motives across the changing landscape of one’s lifetime.

Conclusion
The present research contributes to the growing body of evidence examining the continuation of the parent– child affectional
bond across the lifespan (Cicirelli, 1991). Previous attachment
research in personality and social psychology has predominately
focused on people’s relationships with their romantic partners
(e.g., Bartholomew, 1993; Hazan & Shaver, 1987; Griffin &
Bartholomew, 1994b; Mikulincer & Shaver, 2003; Shaver, Hazan,
& Bradshaw, 1988; Simpson, 1990). The current studies build
from this work to provide the first empirical demonstration of how
adults continue to derive existential security from their continued
attachment to parents. Following Freud (1966/1977, Bowlby
(1982), and Ainsworth (1989), the present results suggest that
parents remain an important source of comfort and security to their
adult offspring, enabling their children to deal with basic human

COX ET AL.

714

fears and anxieties—the safe haven of parental comfort does
indeed endure.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

References
Aiken, L. S., & West, S. G. (1991). Multiple regression: Testing and
interpreting interactions. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Ainsworth, M. D. S. (1989). Attachment beyond infancy. American Psychologist, 44, 709 –716.
Ainsworth, M. D. S. (1991). Attachments and other affectional bonds
across the life cycle. In C. M. Parkes, J. Stevenson-Hinde, & P. Marris
(Eds.), Attachment across the life cycle (pp. 33–51). New York: Routledge.
Allen, J. P., & Land, D. (1999). Attachment in adolescence. In J. Cassidy
& P. R. Shaver (Eds.), Handbook of attachment: Theory, research, and
clinical applications (pp. 319 –335). New York: Guilford Press.
Andersen, S. M., & Baum, A. (1994). Transference in interpersonal relations: Schema-triggered inferences and affect based on significant-other
representations. Journal of Personality, 62, 459 – 498.
Andersen, S. M., & Glassman, N. S. (1996). Responding to significant
others when they are not there: Effects on interpersonal inference,
motivation, and affect. In R. Sorrentino & E. T. Higgins (Eds.), Handbook of motivation and cognition (Vol. 3, pp. 272–331). New York:
Guilford Press.
Arndt, J., & Greenberg, J. (1999). The effects of a self-esteem boost and
mortality salience on responses to boost relevant and irrelevant worldview threats. Personality and Social Psychological Bulletin, 25, 1331–
1341.
Arndt, J., Greenberg, J., & Cook, A. (2002). Mortality salience and the
spreading activation of worldview-relevant constructs: Exploring the
cognitive architecture of terror management. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 131, 307–324.
Arndt, J., Greenberg, J., Schimel, J., Pyszczynski, T., & Solomon, S.
(2002). To belong or not to belong, that is the question: Terror management and identification with gender and ethnicity. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 83, 26 – 43.
Arndt, J., Schimel, J., Greenberg, J., & Pyszczynski, T. (2002). The
intrinsic self and defensiveness: Evidence that activating the intrinsic
self reduces self-handicapping and conformity. Personality and Social
Psychology Bulletin, 28, 671– 683.
Baldwin, M. W., & Sinclair, L. (1996). Self-esteem and “if . . . then”
contingencies of interpersonal acceptance. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 71, 1130 –1141.
Bandura, A. (1977). Social learning theory. New York: General Learning
Press.
Bartholomew, K. (1993). From childhood to adult relationships: Attachment theory and research. In S. Duck (Ed.), Understanding relationship
processes: Vol. 2. Learning about relationships (pp. 30 – 62). Beverly
Hills, CA: Sage.
Bartholomew, K., & Horowitz, L. M. (1991). Attachment styles among
young adults: A test of a four category model. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 61, 226 –244.
Bassili, J. N., & Smith, M. C. (1986). On the spontaneity of trait attribution: Converging evidence for the role of cognitive strategy. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 50, 239 –245.
Becker, E. (1973). The denial of death. New York: Free Press.
Bowlby, J. (1982). Attachment and loss: Vol. 1. Attachment (2nd ed.). New
York: Basic Books.
Brennan, K. A., & Bosson, J. K. (1998). Attachment-style differences in
attitudes toward and reactions to feedback from romantic partners: An
exploration of the relational bases of self-esteem. Personality and Social
Psychology Bulletin, 24, 699 –714.
Brennan, K. A., Clark, C. L., & Shaver, P. R. (1998). Self-report measure-

ment of adult attachment: An integrative overview. In J. A. Simpson &
W. S. Rholes (Eds.), Attachment theory and close relationships (pp.
46 –76). New York: Guildford Press.
Brennan, K. A., & Morris, K. A. (1997). Attachment styles, self-esteem,
and patterns of seeking feedback from romantic partners. Personality
and Social Psychology Bulletin, 23, 23–31.
Brumbaugh, C. C., & Fraley, R. C. (2006). Transference and attachment:
How do attachment patterns get carried forward from one relationship to
the next? Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 32, 552–560.
Byrne, D. (1971). The attraction paradigm. New York: Academic Press.
Cassidy, J., & Shaver, P. R. (1999). Handbook of attachment: Theory,
research, and clinical applications. New York: Guilford Press.
Castano, E. (2004). In case of death, cling to the ingroup. European
Journal of Social Psychology, 34, 375–384.
Chen, S., & Andersen, S. M. (1999). Relationships from the past in the
present: Significant-other representations and transference in interpersonal life. In M. P. Zanna (Ed.), Advances in experimental social
psychology (Vol. 31, pp. 123–190). San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Cicirelli, V. G. (1991). Attachment theory in old age: Protection of the
attached figure. In K. Pillemer & K. McCartney (Eds.), Parent– child
relations across the life span (pp. 25– 42). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Collins, N. L. (1996). Working models of attachment: Implications for
explanation, emotion, and behavior. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 71, 810 – 832.
Collins, N. L., & Read, S. J. (1990). Adult attachment, working models,
and relationship quality in dating couples. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 58, 644 – 663.
Cox, C. R., Goldenberg, J. L., Arndt, J., & Pyszczynski, T. (2007).
Mother’s milk: An existential perspective on negative reactions to
breastfeeding. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 33, 110 –122.
Crocker, J., Luhtanen, R. K., Cooper, M. L., & Bouvrette, S. (2003).
Contingencies of self-worth in college students: Theory and measurement. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 85, 894 –908.
Daly, M., & Wilson, M. (1990). Is parent offspring conflict sex-linked?
Freudian and Darwinian models. Journal of Personality, 58, 163–189.
Dechesne, M., Pyszczynski, T., Arndt, J., Ransom, S., Sheldon, K. M., van
Knippenberg, A., & Janssen, J. (2003). Literal and symbolic immortality: The effect of evidence of literal immortality on self-esteem striving
in response to mortality salience. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 84, 722–737.
Doherty, N. A., & Feeney, J. A. (2004). The composition of attachment
networks throughout the adult years. Personal Relationships, 11, 469 –
488.
Farnham, S. D., Greenwald, A. G., & Banaji, M. R. (1999). Implicit
self-esteem. In D. Abrams & M. A. Hogg (Eds.), Social identity and
social cognition (pp. 230 –248). Oxford, England: Blackwell.
Feeney, B. C., & Collins, N. L. (2001). Predictors of caregiving in adult
intimate relationships: An attachment theoretical perspective. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 80, 972–994.
Feeney, J. A., & Hohaus, L. (2001). Attachment and spousal caregiving.
Personal Relationships, 8, 21–39.
Feeney, J. A., & Noller, P. (1990). Attachment style as a predictor of adult
romantic relationships. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
58, 281–291.
Florian, V., & Mikulincer, M. (1997). Fear of death and the judgment of
social transgressions: A multidimensional of terror management theory.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 73, 369 –380.
Florian, V., Mikulincer, M., & Hirschberger, G. (2002). The anxietybuffering function of close relationships: Evidence that relationship
commitment acts as a terror management mechanism. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 82, 527–542.
Fraley, R. C. (2002). Attachment stability from infancy to adulthood:

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

TERROR MANAGEMENT AND ATTACHMENT
Meta-analysis and dynamic modeling of developmental mechanisms.
Personality and Social Psychology Review, 6, 123–151.
Fraley, R. C., & Davis, K. E. (1997). Attachment formation and transfer in
young adults’ close friendships and romantic relationships. Personal
Relationships, 4, 131–144.
Fraley, R. C., Davis, K. E., & Shaver, P. R. (1998). Dismissing-avoidance
and the defensive organization of emotion, cognition, and behavior. In
J. A. Simpson & W. S. Rholes (Eds.), Attachment theory and close
relationships (pp. 249 –279). New York: Guilford Press.
Fraley, R. C., & Waller, N. G. (1998). Adult attachment patterns: A test of
the typological model. In J. A. Simpson & W. S. Rholes (Eds.), Attachment theory and close relationships (pp. 77–114). New York: Guilford
Press.
Freud, S. (1927). Some psychological consequences of the anatomical
distinction between the sexes. In J. Strachey (Ed. and Trans.), The
standard edition of the complete psychological works of Sigmund Freud
(Vol. 8, pp. 133–142). London: The Hogarth Press.
Freud, S. (1939). Civilization and its discontents (J. Riviere, Trans.).
London: Hogarth Press. (Original work published 1930)
Freud, S. (1957). Three essays on the theory of sexuality. In J. Strachey
(Ed. and Trans.), The standard edition of the complete psychological
works of Sigmund Freud (Vol. 7, pp. 123–246). London: The Hogarth
Press. (Original work published 1905)
Freud, S. (1958). The dynamics of transference. In J. Strachey (Ed. and
Trans.), The standard edition of the complete psychological works of
Sigmund Freud (Vol. 12, pp. 99 –108). London: The Hogarth Press.
(Original work published 1912)
Freud, S. (1977). Introductory lectures on psychoanalysis. (J. Strachey,
Trans.). New York: Norton. (Original work published 1966)
Furman, W., & Buhrmester, D. (1992). Age and sex in perceptions of
networks of personal relationships. Child Development, 63, 103–115.
Geher, G. (2000). Perceived and actual characteristics of parents and
partners: A test of a Freudian model of mate selection. Current Psychology: Developmental, Learning, Personality, Social, 19, 194 –214.
Gilbert, D. T., & Hixon, J. G. (1991). The trouble of thinking: Activation
and application of stereotypic beliefs. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 60, 509 –517.
Greenberg, J., Pyszczynski, T., & Solomon, S. (1986). The causes and
consequences of a need for self-esteem: A terror management theory. In
R. F. Baumeister (Ed.), Public self and private self (pp. 189 –212). New
York: Springer-Verlag.
Greenberg, J., Pyszczynski, T., Solomon, S., Simon, L., & Breus, M.
(1994). Role of consciousness and accessibility of death-related thoughts
in mortality salience effects. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 67, 627– 637.
Greenberg, J., Solomon, S., & Arndt, J. (2008). A basic but uniquely
human motivation: Terror management. In J. Shah (Ed.), Handbook of
motivation science (pp. 114 –134). New York: Guilford Press.
Greenberg, J., Solomon, S., & Pyszczynski, T. (1997). Terror management
theory of self-esteem and social behavior: Empirical assessments and
conceptual refinements. In M. P. Zanna (Ed.), Advances in experimental
social psychology (Vol. 29, pp. 61–139). New York: Academic Press.
Greenwald, A. G., & Farnham, S. D. (2000). Using the implicit association
test to measure self-esteem and self-concept. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 79, 1022–1038.
Greenwald, A. G., McGhee, D. E., & Schwartz, J. L. K. (1998). Measuring
individual differences in implicit cognition: The implicit association test.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 74, 1464 –1480.
Griffin, D., & Bartholomew, K. (1994a). Metaphysics of measurement:
The case of adult attachment. In K. Bartholomew & D. Perlman (Eds.),
Advances in personal relationships: Vol. 5. Attachment processes in
adulthood (pp. 17–52). London: Jessica Kingsley.
Griffin, D., & Bartholomew, K. (1994b). Models of the self and other:

715

Fundamental dimensions underlying measures of adult attachment.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 67, 430 – 445.
Harmon-Jones, E., Simon, L., Greenberg, J., Pyszczynski, T., Solomon, S.,
& McGregor, H. (1997). Terror management theory and self-esteem:
Evidence that increased self-esteem reduces mortality salience effects.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 72, 24 –36.
Hart, J., Shaver, P. R., & Goldenberg, J. L. (2005). Attachment, selfesteem, worldviews, and terror management: Evidence for a tripartite
security system. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 88,
999 –1013.
Hayes, W. N. (1996). Identifying sex from handwriting. Perceptual and
Motor Skills, 83, 791– 800.
Hazan, C., & Shaver, P. R. (1987). Romantic love conceptualized as an
attachment process. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 52,
511–524.
Hazan, C., & Zeifman, D. (1994). Sex and the psychological tether. In D.
Perlman & K. Bartholomew (Eds.), Advances in personal relationships
(Vol. 5, pp. 151–180). London: Kingsley.
Hinkley, K., & Andersen, S. M. (1996). The working self-concept in
transference: Significant-other activation and self-change. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 71, 1279 –1295.
Hirschberger, G., Florian, V., & Mikulincer, M. (2005). Fear and compassion: A terror management analysis of emotional reactions to physical
disability. Rehabilitation Psychology, 50, 246 –257.
Horney, K. (1937). The neurotic personality of our time. New York:
Norton.
Koole, S. L., Dechesne, M., & van Knippenberg, A. (2001). The sting of
death: The effects of mortality salience on implicit self-evaluations.
Unpublished manuscript, University of Nijmegen, Nijmegen, the Netherlands.
Kurdek, L. A. (2002). On being insecure about the assessment of attachment styles. Journal of Social and Personal Relationships, 19, 811– 834.
Landau, M. J., Johns, M., Greenberg, J., Pyszczynski, T., Martens, A.,
Goldenberg, J., Solomon, S., & Martens, A. (2004). A function of form:
Terror management and structuring the social world. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 87, 190 –210.
Landau, M. J., Solomon, S., Greenberg, J., Cohen, F., Pyszczynski, T.,
Arndt, J., Miller, C. H., Ogilvie, D. M., & Cook, A. (2004). Deliver us
from evil: The effects of mortality salience and reminders of 9/11 on
support for President George W. Bush. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 30, 1136 –1150.
Little, A. C., Penton-Voak, I. S., Burt, D. M., & Perrett, D. I. (2003).
Investigating an imprinting-like phenomenon in humans: Partners and
opposite-sex parents have similar hair and eye colour. Evolution and
Human Behavior, 24, 43–51.
Little, A. C., & Perrett, D. I. (2002). Putting beauty back in the eye of the
beholder. Psychologist, 15, 28 –32.
Macrae, C. N., Bodenhausen, G. V., Milne, A. B., & Jetten, J. (1994). Out
of mind but back in sight: Stereotypes on the rebound. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 67, 808 – 817.
Markiewicz, D., Lawford, H., Doyle, A. B., & Haggart, N. (2006). Developmental differences in adolescents’ and young adults’ use of mothers,
fathers, best friends, and romantic partners to fulfill attachment needs.
Journal of Youth and Adolescence, 35, 121–134.
Martens, A., Greenberg, J., Schimel, J., & Landau, M. J. (2004). Ageism
and death: Effects of mortality salience and similarity to elders on
distancing from and derogation of elderly people. Personality and Social
Psychology Bulletin, 30, 1524 –1536.
Mayseless, O. (2004). Home-leaving to military service: Attachment concerns, transfer of attachment functions from parents to peers, and adjustment. Journal of Adolescent Research, 19, 533–558.
Mead, G. H. (1934). Mind, self, and society. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

716

COX ET AL.

Mickelson, K. D., Kessler, R. C., & Shaver, P. R. (1997). Adult attachment
in a nationally representative sample. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 73, 1092–1106.
Mikulincer, M. (1995). Attachment style and the mental representation of
the self. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 69, 1203–1215.
Mikulincer, M., & Florian, V. (2000). Exploring individual differences in
reactions to mortality salience: Does attachment style regulate terror
management mechanisms. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 79, 260 –273.
Mikulincer, M., Florian, V., Birnbaum, G., & Malishkevich, S. (2002). The
death-anxiety buffering function of close relationships: Exploring the
effects of separation reminders on death-thought accessibility. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 28, 287–299.
Mikulincer, M., Florian, V., & Hirschberger, G. (2003). The existential
function of close relationships: Introducing death into the science of
love. Personality and Social Psychology Review, 7, 20 – 40.
Mikulincer, M., Florian, V., & Hirschberger, G. (2004). The terror of death
and the quest for love: An existential perspective on close relationships.
In J. Greenberg, S. L. Koole, & T. Pyszczynski (Eds.), Handbook of
experimental existential psychology (pp. 287–304). New York: Guilford
Press.
Mikulincer, M., Gillath, O., & Shaver, P. R. (2002). Activation of the
attachment system in adulthood: Threat-related primes increase the
accessibility of mental representations of attachment figures. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 83, 881– 895.
Mikulincer, M., & Goodman, G. S. (2006). Dynamics of romantic love:
Attachment, caregiving, and sex. New York: Guilford Press.
Mikulincer, M., & Shaver, P. (2003). The attachment behavioral system in
adulthood: Activation, psychodynamics, and interpersonal processes. In
M. Zanna (Ed.), Advances in experimental social psychology (Vol. 35,
pp. 53–152). New York: Academic Press.
Mikulincer, M., & Shaver, P. R. (2004). Security-based selfrepresentations in adulthood. In W. S. Rholes & J. A. Simpson (Eds.),
Adult attachment: Theory, research, and clinical implications (pp. 159 –
195). New York: Guilford Press.
Murray, S. L., Griffin, D. W., Rose, P., & Bellavia, G. (2003). Calibrating
the sociometer: The relational contingencies of self-esteem. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 85, 63– 84.
Nosek, B. A., & Lane, K. (1999). Analyzing paper-pencil IAT data.
Unpublished manuscript, Yale University.
Owens, G., Crowell, J. A., Pan, H., Treboux, D., O’Connor, E., & Waters,
E. (1995). The prototype hypothesis and the origins of attachment
working models: Adult relationships with parents and romantic partners.
Monographs of the Society for Research in Child Development, 60,
216 –233.
Park, L. E., Crocker, J., & Mickelson, K. D. (2004). Attachment styles and
contingencies of self-worth. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin,
30, 1243–1254.
Pyszczynski, T., & Greenberg, J. (1987). Toward an integration of cognitive and motivational perspectives on social inference: A biased
hypothesis-testing model. In L. Berkowitz (Ed.), Advances in experimental social psychology (Vol. 20, pp. 297–340). San Diego, CA:
Academic Press.
Pyszczynski, T., Greenberg, J., & Solomon, S. (1999). A dual-process
model of defense against conscious and unconscious death-related
thoughts: An extension of terror management theory. Psychological
Review, 106, 835– 845.
Pyszczynski, T., Greenberg, J., Solomon, S., Arndt, J., & Schimel, J.
(2004). Why do people need self-esteem? A theoretical and empirical
review. Psychological Bulletin, 130, 435– 468.
Pyszczynski, T., Wicklund, R. A., Floresky, S., Gauch, G., Koch, S.,
Solomon, S., & Greenberg, J. (1996). Whistling in the dark: Exaggerated

estimates of social consensus in response to incidental reminders of
mortality. Psychological Science, 7, 332–336.
Rank, O. (1973). The trauma of birth. New York: Harcourt, Brace. (Original work published 1929)
Rholes, W. S., Simpson, J. A., & Friedman, M. (2006). Avoidant attachment and the experience of parenting. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 32, 275–285.
Rosenblatt, A., Greenberg, J., Solomon, S., Pyszczynski, T., & Lyon, D.
(1989). Evidence for terror management theory: I. The effects of mortality salience on reactions to those who violate or uphold cultural
values. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 57, 681– 690.
Rosenthal, R., & Rosnow, R. L. (1985). Contrast analysis. Cambridge,
England: Cambridge University Press.
Routledge, C., Arndt, J., & Goldenberg, J. L. (2004). A time to tan:
Proximal and distal effects of mortality salience on sun exposure intentions. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 30, 1347–1358.
Sappington, J., & Money, M. (2003). Sex, gender role, attribution pathology, and handwriting tidiness. Perceptual and Motor Skills, 97, 671–
674.
Schimel, J., Pyszczynski, T., Greenberg, J., O’Mahen, H., & Arndt, J.
(2000). Running from the shadow: Psychological distancing from others
to deny characteristics people fear in themselves. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 78, 446 – 462.
Schimel, J., Simon, L., Greenberg, J., Pyszczynski, T., Solomon, S.,
Waxmonsky, J., & Arndt, J. (1999). Stereotypes and terror management:
Evidence that mortality salience enhances stereotypic thinking and preferences. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 77, 905–926.
Shaver, P. R., Belsky, J., & Brennan, K. A. (2000). Comparing measures
of adult attachment: An examination of interview and self-report methods. Personal Relationships, 7, 25– 43.
Shaver, P. R., Hazan, C., & Bradshaw, D. (1988). Love as attachment: The
integration of three behavioral systems. In R. Sternberg & M. L. Barnes
(Eds.), The psychology of love (pp. 68 –99). New Haven, CT: Yale
University Press.
Shaver, P. R., & Mikulincer, M. (2004). Attachment in the later years: A
commentary. Attachment and Human Development, 6, 451– 464.
Simpson, J. A. (1990). Influence of attachment styles on romantic relationships. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 59, 971–980.
Simpson, J. A., & Rholes, W. S. (1997). Attachment theory and close
relationships. New York: Guilford Press.
Simpson, J. A., Rholes, W. S., & Nelligan, J. (1992). Support-seeking and
support-giving within couples in an anxiety-provoking situation: The
role of attachment styles. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
62, 434 – 446.
Solomon, S., Greenberg, J., & Pyszczynski, T. (1991). Terror management
theory of self-esteem. In C. R. Snyder & D. Forsyth (Eds.), Handbook of
social and clinical psychology: The health perspective (pp. 21– 40). New
York: Pergamon Press.
Sowards, B. A., Moniz, A. J., & Harris, M. J. (1991). Self-esteem and
bolstering: Testing major assumptions of terror management theory.
Representative Research in Social Psychology, 19, 95–106.
Sroufe, L. A., Egeland, B., & Kreutzer, T. (1990). The fate of early
experience following developmental change: Longitudinal approaches to
individual adaptation in childhood. Child Development, 61, 1363–1373.
Steele, C. M., & Aronson, J. (1995). Stereotype threat and the intellectual
test performance of African Americans. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 69, 797– 811.
Sullivan, H. S. (1953). The interpersonal theory of psychiatry. New York:
Norton.
Taubman-Ben-Ari, O., Findler, L., & Mikulincer, M. (2002). The effects of
mortality salience on relationship strivings and beliefs: The moderating
role of attachment style. British Journal of Social Psychology, 41,
419 – 441.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

TERROR MANAGEMENT AND ATTACHMENT
Teachman, B. A., Gapinski, K. D., Brownell, K. D., Rawlins, M., &
Jeyaram, S. (2003). Demonstrations of implicit anti-fat bias: The impact
of providing causal information and evoking empathy. Health Psychology, 22, 68 –78.
Trinke, S. J., & Bartholomew, K. (1997). Hierarchies of attachment relationships in young adulthood. Journal of Social and Personality Relationships, 14, 603– 625.
Tulving, E., Schacter, D. L., & Stark, H. A. (1982). Priming effects in
word-fragment completion are independent of recognition memory.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 8, 336 –342.
van IJzendoorn, M. H. (1996). Commentary. Human Development, 39,
224 –231.
Watson, D., Clark, L. A., & Tellegen, A. (1988). Development and validation of brief measures of positive and negative affect: The PANAS
scales. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 54, 1063–1070.

717

Weiss, R. S. (1986). Continuities and transformations in social relationships from childhood to adulthood. In W. W. Hartup & Z. Rubin (Eds.),
On relationships and development (pp. 95–110). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Winnicott, D. (1960). The theory of the parent– child relationship. International Journal of Psychoanalysis, 41, 585–595.
Wisman, A., & Goldenberg, J. L. (2005). From the grave to the cradle:
Evidence that mortality salience engenders a desire for offspring. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 89, 46 – 61.
Wisman, A., & Koole, S. L. (2003). Hiding in the crowd: Can mortality
salience promote affiliation with others who oppose one’s worldview?
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 84, 511–526.

Received March 22, 2007
Revision received October 4, 2007
Accepted November 5, 2007 䡲

Members of Underrepresented Groups:
Reviewers for Journal Manuscripts Wanted
If you are interested in reviewing manuscripts for APA journals, the APA Publications and
Communications Board would like to invite your participation. Manuscript reviewers are vital to the
publications process. As a reviewer, you would gain valuable experience in publishing. The P&C
Board is particularly interested in encouraging members of underrepresented groups to participate
more in this process.
If you are interested in reviewing manuscripts, please write to the address below. Please note the
following important points:
• To be selected as a reviewer, you must have published articles in peer-reviewed journals. The
experience of publishing provides a reviewer with the basis for preparing a thorough, objective
review.
• To be selected, it is critical to be a regular reader of the five to six empirical journals that are most
central to the area or journal for which you would like to review. Current knowledge of recently
published research provides a reviewer with the knowledge base to evaluate a new submission
within the context of existing research.
• To select the appropriate reviewers for each manuscript, the editor needs detailed information.
Please include with your letter your vita. In the letter, please identify which APA journal(s) you
are interested in, and describe your area of expertise. Be as specific as possible. For example,
“social psychology” is not sufficient—you would need to specify “social cognition” or “attitude
change” as well.
• Reviewing a manuscript takes time (1– 4 hours per manuscript reviewed). If you are selected to
review a manuscript, be prepared to invest the necessary time to evaluate the manuscript
thoroughly.
Write to Journals Office, American Psychological Association, 750 First Street, NE, Washington,
DC 20002-4242.

