Journal of Personality and Social Psychology
2008, Vol. 95, No. 3, 510 –523

Copyright 2008 by the American Psychological Association
0022-3514/08/$12.00 DOI: 10.1037/a0012833

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Increasing and Decreasing Motor and Cognitive Output: A Model of
General Action and Inaction Goals
Dolores Albarracı́n

Ian M. Handley

University of Illinois

Montana State University

Kenji Noguchi

Kathleen C. McCulloch

University of Florida

University of Illinois

Hong Li, Joshua Leeper, and Rick D. Brown

Allison Earl

University of Florida

University of Illinois

William P. Hart
University of Florida
General action and inaction goals can influence the amount of motor or cognitive output irrespective of
the type of behavior in question, with the same stimuli producing trivial and important motor and
cognitive manifestations normally viewed as parts of different systems. A series of experiments examined
the effects of instilling general action and inaction goals using word primes, such as “action” and “rest.”
The first 5 experiments showed that the same stimuli influenced motor output, such as doodling on a
piece of paper and eating, as well as cognitive output, such as recall and problem solving. The last 2
experiments supported the prediction that these diverse effects can result from the instigation of general
action and inaction goals. Specifically, these last 2 studies confirmed that participants were motivated to
achieve active or inactive states and that attaining them decreased the effects of the primes on behavior.
Keywords: action goals, self-regulation, behavior

concept (Bargh et al., 2001). In addition to these specific behavioral
effects of cognitive concepts, evolutionary and motivational considerations suggest a different modality of cognitive control, one that
regulates general action versus inaction independently of what specific behaviors unfold.
General action can be defined as motor and/or cognitive output and
general inaction as the lack of action. Action and inaction are of
course not dichotomous entities but rather two ends of a continuum of
activity. Intense and/or frequent motor and cognitive processes constitute the action end, whereas non-REM sleep exemplifies the inaction end with neither motor output (e.g., leg movement) nor cognitive
output (e.g., dreaming). Given this definition, the action end can
include not only important, well-planned, effortful behaviors, such as
acquiring knowledge, but also seemingly more senseless behaviors,
such as doodling, as well as relatively effortless behavior, such as
eating when food is present. In other words, general action encompasses motor and/or cognitive output and unifies a wide variety of
behaviors that may be driven by different goals. Whereas acquiring
knowledge and doodling during a lecture may be respectively driven
by the goals to achieve a good grade versus to entertain oneself,
respectively, both acquiring knowledge and doodling are identical
from a general action perspective.
The regulation of general activity undoubtedly owes to biological–
dispositional factors, such as metabolic levels (Lawrence, Thongprasert, & Durnin, 1988), processing speed (Anderson, 1992), or the

The cognitive control of behavior is a socially successful way to
steer individuals into efficacious specific behavior that is beneficial
for themselves and their groups. Socially valued concepts can become
linked to socially appropriate behaviors that are automatically elicited
from a reminder of the concept or a goal linked to that concept (Bargh,
Gollwitzer, Lee-Chai, Barndollar, & Trötschel, 2001). For example,
people who are incidentally reminded of “success” enact competitive
behaviors because these specific behaviors are tightly linked to the

Dolores Albarracı́n, Kathleen C. McCulloch, and Allison Earl, Department of Psychology, University of Illinois; Ian M. Handley, Department of
Psychology, Montana State University; Kenji Noguchi, Hong Li, Joshua
Leeper, Rick D. Brown, and William P. Hart, Department of Psychology,
University of Florida.
The research was facilitated by grants from the National Institutes of
Health (K02-MH01861 and R01-NR08325). We thank Ece Kumkale,
Brian Cline, and Wei Wang, as well as the undergraduate research assistants who had worked in Dolores Albarracı́n’s lab during the 2003–2007
academic years for their invaluable assistance with this project. We also
thank the attitudes lab at the Psychology Department at the University of
Florida and Martin Repetto for a discussion of the ideas reported in this
article, and Joel B. Cohen, Kentaro Fujita, Angela Lee, and Robert S. Wyer
for comments on an earlier article on this topic.
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Dolores
Albarracı́n, Department of Psychology, University of Illinois, 603 East
Daniel Street, Champaign, IL 61820. E-mail: dalbarra@uiuc.edu
510

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

GENERAL ACTION AND INACTION GOALS

genetic bases of bipolar disorder (Baum et al., 2008). There are also
likely social factors. Somewhat surprisingly, however, social psychology has paid little attention to processes underlying general activity
levels. Instead, social psychology has concentrated on predicting,
changing, and priming specific motor or cognitive behaviors, such as
increasing seatbelt use (e.g., Ajzen & Fishbein, 2005) or reducing
prejudiced responses to other people (see Fiske & Taylor, 1991). As
a result, there has been no theoretical exploration of the processes
underlying action and inaction.
This article addresses the possibility of a goal-mediated regulation
of activity level, with a disregard for the type of activity that is
regulated. General action and inaction goals are goals with end states
at the extremes of the continuum of activity level (either high or low
motor and cognitive output). When set, these goals can trigger a
search for available and subjectively relevant means to reach these
end states of high or low activity. That is, just as with the satisfaction
of more specific goals, the satisfaction of general goals should proceed through the identification of available and appropriate courses of
action that can satisfy the goal (Bargh et al., 2001; Kruglanski et al.,
2002; Moskowitz, Li, & Kirk, 2004). Both action and inaction goals
imply commitment of effort toward the desired end state and should
operate like other goals (cf. Wright & Brehm, 1989).
Although general action and inaction goals are purported to
operate in ways similar to more specific goals, this conceptualization goes beyond current knowledge about human behavior. For
example, in the domain of individual differences, locomotion is
defined as the tendency to engage in goal-directed behavior and
movement and is supposed to be orthogonal to assessment (i.e., the
tendency to analyze and think deeply about any situation; Kruglanski et al., 2000). Likewise, past research has shown that certain
decisions involve brain pathways that are independent of the type
of motor behavior that is executed (Heekeren, Marrett, Ruff,
Bandettini, & Ungerleider, 2006). In this context, our model offers
a way in which both motor and cognitive activity (e.g., locomotion
and assessment) can obey the same principle. As another example,
goals have been insightfully described as systems (Bandura, 1989;
Kruglanski et al., 2002; Pervin, 1983; Powers, 1973, 1978), but no
theoretical or empirical work has been previously conducted on
goals that influence activity level. General action and inaction
goals may trigger behaviors typically construed as part of different
systems (e.g., an achievement goal system from an affiliation goal
system or a dietary goal system).
In this article, we primed participants with words related to
general action (e.g., “go,” “active”) or inaction (e.g., “rest,”
“stop”). The experimental situations were designed so that participants had to either choose between a discreet active choice (e.g.,
doodling or making a paper airplane) versus an inactive choice
(i.e., putting one’s head down for rest) or could choose to display
a continuous behavior indicative of motor or cognitive output (e.g.,
the number of consumed food items or the amount of knowledge
resulting from reading a text). Given a single focal way of satisfying action or inaction goals, our model’s prediction was straightforward. Specifically, action priming should lead to choosing a
more active task and should cause more motor or cognitive output
(e.g., choice of doodling on a piece of paper vs. rest, more learning
vs. less learning) than inaction priming would. Goal mediation was
assessed in subsequent experiments by examining, for example,
whether activities that should satisfy general action and inaction
goals reduce the behavioral effects of these primes (Marsh, Hicks,

511

& Bink, 1998). This pattern should not emerge if participants are
simply executing prime-consistent behavioral procedures but are
not motivated by, and thus remain insensitive to, the outcomes of
their choices.
Understanding the effects of general action and inaction goals is
important for various theoretical and practical reasons. First, our
hypothesis implies that people control engaging in behavior that
leads to motor or cognitive output before they control the quality
or type of output. The usual tenet is that people strive to perform
useful or desirable activity (e.g., Fishbein & Ajzen, 1975), not just
activity. Second, an interesting aspect is that these goals allow for
top-down influences on both trivial behaviors, such as doodling
during a lecture, as well as learning the presented material.
Whereas conscientious and impulsive behaviors are seen as antagonistic phenomena (Barratt, 1985), we propose a mechanism that
can produce both. Third, whereas inaction is normally seen as a
failure to act (Roese, Hur, & Pennington, 1999), our model suggests that inaction can be an end state that people pursue. Last,
evidence that these goals exist may be important in the context of
goal and behavior research. Action and inaction goals, for example, may increase the likelihood of pursuing other goals that are of
interest to researchers (D. C. McClelland, Atkinson, Clark, &
Lowell, 1953) and fit well within the hierarchical view (Bandura,
1989; Kruglanski et al., 2002; Pervin, 1983; Powers, 1973, 1978).

EFFECTS OF GENERAL ACTION AND INACTION
CONCEPTS AND POSSIBLE GOAL MEDIATION
If general action and inaction goals are plausible, using general
action and inaction words as primes should influence physical and
mental activities of various kinds. Therefore, one way of demonstrating these goals’ existence is to show effects of general action
and inaction words on diverse activities. This demonstration requires first presenting word primes and then allowing individuals
to link their primed goals to the concrete behaviors that are central
to the study. For example, individuals may be offered opportunities to either rest or perform a task. As the tasks map onto
culturally defined means of action and inaction, the action prime
may trigger high motor or cognitive output, whereas the inaction
prime may trigger rest. That is, people who are primed with
general action may choose an active task, whereas people primed
with inaction may choose rest. By the same token, relative to
general inaction goals, general action goals may yield more eating,
finer segmentation of an observed behavior, higher recall of a text,
and more effective problem solving. In other words, motor and
cognitive output may be greater when general action rather than
general inaction concepts are primed.
Importantly, action and inaction goals should have goal properties, involving but going beyond mere concept activation. First,
goals are outcome driven; they are about maximizing action or
inaction. In many conditions, the behaviors that lead to the goal’s
end state are likely to be as active or inactive as the end state is. For
example, satisfying action goals may entail simply selecting more
active behaviors (leading to more motor or cognitive output).
Correspondingly, satisfying inaction goals may entail simply selecting more inactive behaviors. Nevertheless, other situations are
possible. If indeed goals are at stake, behaviors should be selected
to achieve an overall outcome regardless of the active or inactive
quality of the intervening behaviors. As a result, a long active end

ALBARRACÍN ET AL.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

512

state could be potentially achieved through an inactive mean and a
long inactive end state could be potentially achieved through an
active mean. For instance, one may rapidly solve a problem now in
order to sleep for an extended time afterward or briefly sleep now
in order to solve a problem for an extended time afterward. If the
outcomes are motivating, action goals will trigger the search for
the longest active outcome even if the means are inactive. Likewise, inaction goals may trigger a search for the longest inactive
outcome even if the immediate means are active. In contrast, if
what triggers activity/inactivity is simply a procedure rather than a
goal, immediate concept-consistent behavior may emerge irrespective of the ultimate amount of activity.
Second, the behavioral effects of the goals on motor and cognitive
output should be stronger before the goal is satisfied than they are
after the goal is satisfied (Atkinson & Birch, 1970; Ferguson & Bargh,
2004; Förster, Liberman, & Higgins, 2005; Kawada, Oettingen, Gollwitzer, & Bargh, 2004; Lewin, 1935; Marsh et al., 1998; Zeigarnik,
1967). For example, action goals should yield more overall active
behavior provided that no prior activity has satisfied the goal.
Likewise, inaction goals should yield less overall active behavior
provided that no prior inactive behavior has satisfied the goal.
Following a satisfaction opportunity, however, these effects should
decrease and may even reverse.
We suggest that action and inaction goals are likely to exist as
a natural consequence of evolutionary pressures (for an analysis of
evolutionary pressures on cognition, see Pinkerton, 1997). Upon
encountering new situations, for example, mere activity can introduce solutions and generate knowledge in ways that are not facilitated by specific forms of cognitive control (for a discussion of
flexibility, see Kruglanski et al., 2000). Eventually, a useful activity may develop that reduces the need for generalized activity and
allows for refocusing on specific behaviors. Further, when one
specific course of action fails, there are advantages to taking a
general approach to the problem (“I need to do something, but
what?”). Many solutions derive from the ability to reconsider all
possible motor and cognitive processes rather than insisting on
specific behaviors that have led to failure in the past.
General inaction goals may also offer advantages. To begin with,
conserving energy is important for survival. As a result, successful
adaptation to the environment may require a mechanism to conserve
energy by allowing certain symbols or social stimuli to trigger cessation of activity. Furthermore, there may be positive influences of
inaction on problem solving. For example, when all courses of action
fail, awaiting environmental input may be the best solution. In this
way, concepts linked to general inaction may prevent hopeless action
while an appropriate behavior is identified. As another example, the
absence of immediate action during the U.S. Cuban missile crisis (The
Avalon Project, 2007) produced better outcomes than those that were
expected from a more active response.

THE PRESENT ARTICLE
The procedures used to prime goals in recent years (e.g., Bargh
& Chartrand, 1999; Bargh et al., 2001; Moskowitz et al., 2004)
seemed ideal to study general action and inaction goals. As general
action goals presumably influence a variety of behaviors, incidental exposure to the word “action” may stimulate high frequency of
behaviors with motor and/or cognitive output. In contrast, incidental exposure to the word “inaction” may stimulate people to rest

and to be less active, even when active behaviors are situationally
required (e.g., as part of the experimental procedures). Correspondingly, the word “rest” may decrease behaviors yielding high
motor or cognitive output across a variety of situations.
We used words like “action” and “go” versus “rest” and “stop”
as part of word completion tasks, detection of stimuli presented on
the screen tasks, or scrambled sentences tasks. In Experiments 1,
2, and 3, general action primes were hypothesized to yield processes conducive to more motor output to a greater extent than
inaction primes were. In Experiment 1, previously primed participants were told that they would have a break during which they
could choose to fold or doodle on a piece of paper or to close their
eyes and rest. Based on our hypotheses of more motor output in
response to action rather than inaction concepts, the action primes
should elicit higher proportion of folding/doodling than the inaction primes should, whereas the inaction primes should elicit a
higher proportion of rest than the action primes should. In Experiment 2, word primes of action or inaction were followed by an
opportunity to eat grapes that were presented to the study participants. Given that eating is a process involving motor output (e.g.,
delivering hand to mouth and chewing), we hypothesized that
action primes would yield more eating than inaction primes would.
In Experiment 3, previously primed participants watched a video
of a college student performing a series of daily activities, such as
checking e-mail and having a drink (Ratcliff et al., 2004). The
participants’ task was to watch the video and to press the computer
space bar to divide the video into as many units of meaningful
behavior as they identified. The number of presses was expected to
be higher after action primes than after inaction primes.
Experiments 4 and 5 were designed to demonstrate effects of the
primes on two cognitive activities, with the expectations of more
recall and problem solving in action-prime conditions rather than
inaction-prime conditions. In Experiment 4, we used brief supraliminal exposures (50 ms) to action versus inaction words and then
asked participants to study a passage about evolutionary psychology. Correct recall of the material afterward was expected to be
higher after action primes than after inaction primes. In Experiment 5, participants first received the primes and then received
verbal and math problems to solve. Given higher cognitive output,
we expected a higher number of correctly solved problems when
the prime was action than when the prime was inaction.
The last two experiments of our series were designed to validate
the assumptions that goals may mediate the effects of general
action and inaction words. In Experiment 6, participants first
completed word fragments that included either action or inaction
completions. Similar to the earlier experiments, half of the participants (control condition) chose to rest or work on an intellectual
problem for 30 s. The other half (experimental condition) of the
participants chose either 30 s of rest followed by 3 min of solving
verbal or math problems or 30 s of problem-solving followed by 3
min of rest. The outcome variable was the dichotomous immediate
choice, which should be prime consistent in the control condition
but prime inconsistent in the experimental condition.
In Experiment 7, we primed participants with action, control, or
inaction words and then introduced an intermediate task that was
either active or inactive. The task could be either doodling on/
folding an available piece of paper or resting for 2 min. Following
the intermediate task, participants read a text about vegetarianism
and listed their thoughts about what they read. The number of

GENERAL ACTION AND INACTION GOALS

listed thoughts was used as a measure of motor/cognitive activity
and should be greater when action goals are operating. Thus,
unsatisfied action goals should produce a greater number of
thoughts than unsatisfied inaction goals would. Importantly, however, these effects should be attenuated or even reversed when the
preceding task had the potential to satisfy the primed goals.

EXPERIMENTS 1, 2, AND 3: MOTOR OUTPUT
Experiment 1: Folding Paper Airplanes/Doodling Versus
Resting

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Overview
In this experiment, participants first completed several word
fragments to form a word. For about half of these participants,
several of the completed words related to action. For the other half,
the words related to inaction. Next, participants were asked to clear
their minds by choosing either to fold or doodle on a piece of paper
(active task) or to simply relax (inactive task). We predicted that
participants primed with action would be more likely to choose the
active, whereas participants primed with rest would be more likely
to choose the inactive behavior. Importantly, the primes should
produce these patterns of behavior because they activate action and
inaction concepts and possibly concept-related goals. Therefore,
prior to this experiment, we obtained evidence about concept
activation using a lexical decision task. In another pretest, measures of mood were included to rule out the possibility that the
primes had effects on positive and negative feelings.

Method
Participants and Design
Ninety-eight male and female students attending the University
of Florida participated in this experiment in return for partial
course credit. Participants were randomly assigned to either an
action-prime condition or an inaction-prime condition. The design
was a two-cell between-subjects design. There were also two
pretests performed on independent study samples.

Experimental Procedures
Participants were first told that they would complete several
tasks within their experimental session. The first of these tasks
ostensibly measured verbal ability and was designed to prime
participants with an action or an inaction concept. After the priming, participants were given an actual choice between an active and
inactive task. The choice was followed by several filler tasks.
Action and inaction primes. In the beginning of this experiment,
we explained that we needed to administer a quick measure of verbal
ability. Participants were asked to complete 20 words, 8 of which
connoted either “action” or “inaction.” Depending on random allocation, half of the participants received 8 incomplete rest-related words
that could be completed as “still,” “pause,” “interrupt,” “calm,”
“freeze,” “unable,” “stop,” and “paralyze,” whereas the other half
received 8 action-related words that could be completed as “motivation,” “doing,” “behavior,” “engage,” “action,” “make,” “go,” and
“active.” Most of these words had high associations with “action” and
“rest” in the (empirically derived) Computerized Edinburgh Associa-

513

tive Thesaurus (Kiss, Armstrong, Milroy, & Piper, 1973). Some
critical pretests for the concept activation and potential effects on
mood are detailed presently.
Choice of tasks. After completing the priming task, participants were told to clear their minds before proceeding to other
tasks. With this ostensible purpose, participants were given 2 min
of rest for which they could choose one of two tasks. Specifically,
participants read the following:
We will now give you two minutes to clear your mind. During this
time, you should either: 1) remain seated and close your eyes for two
minutes. During this time you should try to calmly relax and clear
your mind, give your brain a break, or 2) do something with the scrap
piece of paper you see at your computer station for two minutes.
During this time you can doodle on the paper, fold it, or even make
something like a paper airplane.

The order of presentation of the active and inactive options was
counterbalanced. After making their choice, participants learned
that the computer would automatically proceed to the next screen
after the 2 min had elapsed. After the 2-min period, participants
were asked, “Did you remain seated with your eyes closed or did
you do something with the piece of paper?,” and they responded by
checking the box for either the number 1 (I sat with my eyes
closed) or 2 (I did something with the paper). These responses
were verified by observation on the part of a research assistant.

Pretesting
Two independent groups of 60 and 35 (men and women, respectively) participants were used to determine whether the word
primes produced corresponding concept activation and to rule out
possible mood effects. These participants were primed with action
and inaction as in the main study.
Concept activation check. Following the word-completion
manipulation, the first pretest (N ⫽ 60) entailed a lexical decision
task in which 10 action words shown in the priming task (e.g.,
“active,” “go,” “move,” and “behavior”), 10 action words not
shown in the priming task (e.g., “run,” “jump,” “hit,” and “build”),
10 previously shown inaction words (e.g., “stop,” “calm,”
“freeze,” and “relax”), and 10 not-previously-shown inaction
words (e.g., “dormant,” “sleep,” “rest,” and “serene”) were presented along with corresponding sets of 10 filler words (e.g.,
“day,” “wall,” “sponge,” and “lemonade”). The fillers were
matched in word frequency, word length, and number of syllables
to their respective critical words. A total of 60 nonwords (e.g.,
“bitavior,” “mobe,” srod,” and “cilt”) were also included.
The lexical decision task consisted of 10 critical blocks with six
words from each word category and six nonwords per block.
Before the critical blocks, one block of practice trials was run
containing six neutral words (e.g., “television,” “apple,” and
“this”) and six nonwords. Half of the participants were instructed
to press the “9” key on the keyboard if they thought the stimulus
on the screen was a word. Correspondingly, they were instructed to
push the “1” key on the keyboard if they thought that the stimulus
was a nonword. For the other half of the participants, the correspondence of the keys and words/nonwords was switched. (Order
did not make a difference.) The participants were instructed to
respond as quickly and accurately as possible.

ALBARRACÍN ET AL.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

514

Reaction times greater than 3,000 ms and less than 100 ms were
trimmed, and words not correctly completed (over all words: M ⫽
2.30%, SD ⫽ 2.34%, incorrect completions) were set as missing
values (Bargh & Chartrand, 2000). Then, means and standard
deviations of reaction times of all the words were calculated for
each participant. The responses greater than 2.5 standard deviations from the mean for each participant were excluded (Bargh &
Chartrand, 2000). After that, reaction times for each word set were
averaged (Bargh & Chartrand, 2000).
Checks for mood effects. A separate group of students (N ⫽
35) underwent the same manipulation procedures as the main
study and then reported their affective feelings. Specifically, after
the word-completion task, participants used 1 to 11 scales to
indicate whether they felt good versus bad, disappointed versus
satisfied, sad versus happy, and displeased versus pleased. Responses to these four scales were used as an index of feelings
valence (␣ ⫽ .97).

Results
Pretests of Effects of Word Primes
The pretests were conducted to verify that the primes produced
corresponding concept activation without altering participants’
mood. Each test is described in turn.
Concept activation. We first analyzed the mean time to respond to action, inaction, and filler words as a function of primes
using an analysis of variance (ANOVA).1 These analyses indicated
that action primes yielded faster responses than inaction primes did
for all types of words (for action vs. inaction primes, respectively:
action words, M ⫽ 562.74, SD ⫽ 62.74 vs. M ⫽ 623.81, SD ⫽
144.15; action-word-corresponding fillers, M ⫽ 578.94, SD ⫽
72.02 vs. M ⫽ 628.83, SD ⫽ 135.27; inaction words, M ⫽ 595.18,
SD ⫽ 63.53 vs. M ⫽ 628.77, SD ⫽ 145.76; inaction-wordcorresponding fillers, M ⫽ 594.38, SD ⫽ 67.64 vs. M ⫽ 652.26,
SD ⫽ 157.13). Given these generalized effects of the primes on
response speed, the proper comparisons entail corrected response
times, which were obtained after subtracting either action or inaction words from their corresponding matched fillers. Positive numbers in each case indicate that the reaction times for the action or
inaction targets were faster (i.e., more activation) than the ones for
fillers were, a zero indicates no difference, and negative numbers
suggest greater difficulty for targets than for fillers.
The corrected action versus the corrected inaction indexes were
analyzed using an ANOVA with type-of-word index as a withinsubjects factor and prime (action vs. inaction) as a betweensubjects factor. As one might expect if the primes elicit opposing
concepts, there was a significant interaction between type-of-word
index and prime, F(1, 58) ⫽ 4.05, p ⫽ .04. The direction of the
index of activation of action words was higher in action-prime
conditions than in inaction-prime conditions (M ⫽ 16.20, SD ⫽
36.40, and M ⫽ 5.02, SD ⫽ 47.76, respectively), p for contrast ⫽
.31. Correspondingly, the direction of the index of activation of
inaction words was higher in inaction-prime conditions than in
action-prime conditions (M ⫽ 23.49, SD ⫽ 54.74, and M ⫽
⫺0.80, SD ⫽ 42.66, respectively), p for contrast ⫽ .06. The
absolute effect sizes corresponding to each contrast did not differ
significantly from each other and in combination reached the
significance indicated by the interaction. These results suggest that

action primes activated action concepts more than they did inaction concepts, whereas inaction primes activated inaction concepts
more than they did action concepts.
Feelings. With respect to effects on feelings, mood was not
affected by the manipulation. Specifically, participants felt similarly positive feelings in action and inaction conditions (M ⫽ 8.18,
SD ⫽ 1.88 vs. M ⫽ 7.66, SD ⫽ 2.85, respectively), F(1, 33) ⫽
0.41, ns. Mood was also measured in several of the subsequent
studies with similarly null results, which are not presented for the
sake of brevity. In combination with the lexical decision task data,
these null effects render confidence in the possibility of concept
activation without associated differences in feeling valence.

Effects on Active Versus Inactive Choices
The analysis of participants’ behavior in Experiment 1 was
consistent with predictions. Participants who received the action
prime were more likely to choose the active task (62%, N ⫽ 33)
than they were the inactive task (38%, N ⫽ 20). In contrast,
participants who received the inaction prime were more likely to
choose the inactive task (64%, N ⫽ 29) than they were the active
task (36%, N ⫽ 16). According to a kappa statistic, the association
between the action/inaction prime and the dichotomous behavioral
measure was statistically significant, ␬(1, 98) ⫽ .27, p ⫽ .008.

Discussion
The data from Experiment 1 supported the hypothesis that subtly
manipulated general action and inaction concepts can yield choices
with relatively more and less motor output without producing differences in affective feelings. This pattern is consistent with the possibility that action and inaction goals influence motor output. To gain
further support for our hypothesis, a second experiment was conducted using a different paradigm that can also capture processes with
overt motor output. This second study also included a check for
suspicion to rule out experimental demand effects. Later studies
validated the goal mediation interpretation of our findings.

Experiment 2: Eating Behavior
Overview
The purpose of Experiment 2 was to test whether action and
inaction concepts correspondingly increase or decrease the amount
of motor output associated with eating. The first task was the
word-completion task used in the first experiment. Then, participants were given a chance to sample some grapes from a bowl
brought to their computer station.

Method
Participants and Design
We recruited 38 undergraduate students at the University of
Florida to participate in the study in exchange for credits in an
1
An additional analysis showed no main effect or interactions for the
use of words that were previously shown as primes and words not previously shown. This finding suggests that the concept activation was strong.

GENERAL ACTION AND INACTION GOALS

introductory psychology course. A two-cell (prime: action vs.
inaction) between-subjects design was employed.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Procedures and Dependent Measure
Participants in this study first completed a series of word strings
similar to the ones in the first study. Next, participants were told
that they would have an opportunity to sample grapes that have
been kept fresh in a new type of plastic container. After that, the
research assistant presented the participant with a Styrofoam bowl
containing 15 red grapes. The dependent measure in this study was
the number of grapes eaten, which was obtained by asking participants at the very end of the experiment, before the debriefing,
“How many grapes are left in your bowl?” Research assistants also
counted the number of grapes remaining at the end of the session
to verify participants’ responses. Furthermore, at the end of the
study, several questions probing for suspicion and experimental
demand were included. Specifically, participants were asked (a)
“what was the purpose of the experiment?,” (b) “do you think any
tasks were related?,” (c) “do you think any earlier task affected
your eating?,” and (d) “did you notice anything about the experiment that seemed strange?” Responses were coded for suspicion
and awareness of the hypothesis.

Results and Discussion
The number of grapes participants ate was analyzed as a function of prime. As predicted, however, those primed with action ate
more than those primed with inaction (M ⫽ 13.11, SD ⫽ 3.31 vs.
M ⫽ 9.28, SD ⫽ 4.74). This predicted pattern was statistically
significant, F(1, 36) ⫽ 8.18, p ⫽ .007, and consistent with the
hypothesis that action and inaction goals affect motor output.
Importantly, no participant manifested suspicion or guessed the
study hypothesis, thus increasing confidence in the subtlety of our
manipulation. Similar checks in subsequent studies also revealed
no awareness of the experimental hypothesis.
In sum, Experiment 2 confirmed our hypothesis that priming
participants with action concepts would produce more motor eating behavior. Experiment 3 investigated segmentation of an observed behavioral sequence reflected in segmentation/space-bar
pressing. We expected more frequent segmentation/space-bar
pressing following action primes than following inaction primes.
This experiment also included a control-prime condition.

Experiment 3: Space-Bar Pressing to Segment Behavior
Overview
In Experiment 3, we expected that segmenting observed behavior would be contingent on the priming of action or inaction.
Behavioral-segmentation output was measured by the number of
times participants pressed the space bar on the computer keyboard
while watching the videotaped behavior of another person. Specifically, participants were primed with action, inaction, or neutral
words, and then watched and segmented a 3-min long video of a
student performing some mundane behaviors in a dormitory.
We predicted that participants initially primed with action concepts
would produce more behavioral segments than would participants
who received inaction concepts. A growing body of work within the
person-perception literature has shown that more effortful cognitive

515

processing of a person’s behavior yields greater number of produced
segments (e.g., Handley & Lassiter, 2002; Lassiter, Briggs, & Bowman, 1991; Lassiter, Geers, & Apple, 2002; Lassiter, Stone, & Rogers, 1988). Although behavioral segmentation can be considered a
measure of both motor and cognitive output, space-bar pressing
comprises a precise measure of motor behavior. The following two
experiments, however, included cognitive performance as a direct
measure of cognitive output.
The behavior of the control participants was expected to fall
somewhere in between the action and inaction conditions. That is,
the relative placement of the control should depend on the baseline
level of activity of participants in a given study, and may vary with
a number of factors (e.g., time of day, time of the semester,
weather). Importantly, however, the control condition should be
neither less active than the inaction-prime condition nor more
active than the action-prime conditions. Otherwise, the primes
could not be construed as eliciting behavior at the extremes of the
activity continuum.

Method
Participants and Design
One hundred eighty-six male and female students attending the
University of Florida participated in this experiment in return for
partial course credit. Participants were randomly assigned to
action-, inaction-, or control-prime conditions.

Procedure
Participants were primed with action or inaction using the same
procedures as in Experiment 1. However, Experiment 3 further
included a control task containing eight word fragments that could
be completed as words unrelated to either action or inaction (e.g.,
“pear”). After completing the priming task, participants were informed that they would watch a short silent video as part of a study
on person perception. They were asked to identify any meaningful
behavior in the video and received examples of meaningful behaviors (see Ratcliff et al., 2004). An example illustrated various
ways to segment the behaviors enacted by an individual reading
instructions to a participant. Specifically, the participant might
identify many behaviors, such as the individual standing in front of
the participant, reading instructions, talking out loud, making eye
contact and other gestures, listening to the participant, and answering the participant’s questions. Or, the participant might identify
fewer behaviors, such as noting that the individual is standing,
reading out loud, and responding, or even only that the individual
is communicating instructions. The instructions then stressed that
the participants should identify whatever behaviors seemed natural
and meaningful to them and that there was no right or wrong way
of completing this task. After this clarification, participants were
asked to press the space bar of the computer every time they
identified a meaningful behavior in the upcoming video.
Participants then watched a 3-min video of a Caucasian male in
his early 20s engaging in mundane activities, such as drinking a
beer, working on his computer, and sifting through papers on his
desk. The computer recorded the number of times each participant
pressed the space bar while watching the video. This tally served
as our dependent measure, with greater number of units indicating

ALBARRACÍN ET AL.

516

more output or active behavior. As mentioned before, this measure
should detect motor pressing of the space bar, in addition to
perhaps cognitive thought about the observed behaviors.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Results and Discussion
Three participants identified no meaningful behaviors from the
video and 5 other participants segmented the behavior sequence at a
rate of 3 standard deviations above the mean for this measure. Therefore, the data from these individuals were removed from the below
analyses, even though this procedure did not significantly alter the
results. The reported results are based on data from 178 participants.
The number of meaningful behaviors identified by participants was
analyzed as a function of prime (action, control, or inaction) using an
ANOVA. The means corresponding to this analysis indicate that
action primes (M ⫽ 35.85, SD ⫽ 24.98) led to identifying more
behaviors than did either control (M ⫽ 29.02, SD ⫽ 18.85) or inaction
primes (M ⫽ 26.67, SD ⫽ 15.99). Moreover, the mean of the control
prime fell in between the action and inaction primes. This pattern of
means was supported by a significant effect of the primes, F(2,
175) ⫽ 3.28, p ⫽ .04. In addition, participants primed with action
identified significantly more behaviors than did either participants
primed with inaction or participants in the control condition ( p for
contrasts ⫽ .02 in each case). Finally, participants in the inaction and
control conditions did not significantly differ in the number of identified behavioral units ( p for contrast ⫽ .48). In sum, the study
confirmed that the effects of the primes mapped onto action and
inaction rather than producing two different effects falling both above
or both below the baseline level of activity. Although in this study the
difference between control and inaction primes was nonsignificant, a
later study produced a significant difference between control and
inaction primes.
In conclusion, this study demonstrated that action (vs. inaction)
primes yield a larger number of presses to segment observed
behavior. Thus, these data lend further support to our argument
that general action and inaction concepts can trigger various forms
of activity. In addition, the study showed that the action primes
produced states that were more active than the control condition
did. Importantly, however, the inaction-prime condition did not
differ significantly from the control condition. This finding may
imply that the baseline level was fairly inactive to begin with but
suggests the need for further data comparing inaction and control
primes. Thus, we tackle this issue later in Experiment 6.

EXPERIMENTS 4 AND 5: COGNITIVE OUTPUT
Experiment 4: Text Recall
Overview
Experiment 4 investigated the association between general action/inaction primes and processes with strictly cognitive output.
Specifically, the purpose was to determine whether action concepts
promote greater recall of written material than inaction concepts
do. In this study, participants first received an ostensible reactionspeed test. In reality, this test contained briefly presented supraliminal action or inaction primes. After the test, participants read
an informational passage about dominance hierarchies in different
types of societies. After reading this material, they completed a test
assessing their recall of the information contained in the passage.

Method
Participants and Design
Thirty-seven female and male undergraduate students at the
University of Florida participated in exchange for credits in an
introductory psychology course. A two-cell (prime: inaction vs.
action) between-subjects design was employed.

Procedures
Under the pretense of a reaction-speed test, participants were
first primed with action versus inaction goals. Following this
priming task, participants were asked to quietly study a text for 6
min. Immediately after the presentation of this passage, participants answered nine open-ended questions about the material. The
coded correctness of the answers was used to determine the effects
of action versus inaction concepts on amount of recall.

Materials and Measures
Priming task. The action or inaction goals were primed using a
16-item priming task. Specifically, each of the primes was presented
on the center of the screen for 50 ms following a string of
“&&&&&&” (presented 100 ms before the prime), which functioned
as a fixation point, and then followed by “XXXXXX” (presented after
the prime was on the screen for 50 ms). The participants’ task was to
press the space bar on the keyboard as quickly as possible when
“XXXXXX” appeared on the screen. When participants pressed the
space bar, another priming sequence began. Two variants of this task
were constructed, one to prime general action and the other to prime
general inaction. The primes and fillers used in these tasks were the
same as those used in Experiment 1. After the task was complete, all
participants read “You did a good job, congratulations!” regardless of
their actual reaction times.
Educational passage on evolutionary psychology. We used a
771-word passage extracted from an evolutionary psychology book.
This passage described the history and development of human dominance hierarchies. The material was presented to participants sentence by sentence with a 15-s break between each. Participants were
instructed to think about the passage while reading it quietly.
Dependent measures. A set of nine open-ended questions was
used to assess participants’ recall of the material. Two independent
raters coded each question in terms of correctness (interrater
kappa ⬎ .93). For example, the passage argued that modern
humans, like other primate species, form stable dominance hierarchies that have been observed among preschool children, human
adolescents, and adults in prison. Correspondingly, the first question asked, “What groups were observed to verify this?” The
correct answer was “human preschool children, human adolescents, and adults in prison.” Answers that failed to mention any of
the three groups were coded as 0 (incorrect) whereas answers that
correctly identified at least one group were coded as 1 (correct).
An overall index of correctness was computed by obtaining the
proportion of correct responses out of nine questions. Higher
numbers in this index indicated higher recall of the material.

Results and Discussion
The means of correctness were analyzed as a function of prime
(inaction vs. action) using an ANOVA. As expected, recipients of

GENERAL ACTION AND INACTION GOALS

action primes responded with more correct answers than did recipients of inaction primes (M of proportions ⫽ 0.58, SD ⫽ 0.11
vs. M ⫽ 0.45, SD ⫽ 0.21, respectively), F(1, 35) ⫽ 5.55, p ⫽ .03.
Thus, this experiment verified that action and inaction primes
influence levels of cognitive activities, extending the previous
findings beyond effects on motor behavior. These effects are
consistent with the possible activation of general action and inaction goals and were conceptually replicated in Experiment 5.

Experiment 5: Number of Solved Problems

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Overview
In this experiment, participants arranged previously scrambled
sentences that contained a high proportion of words related to
either action or inaction. Following a brief preparation period,
participants were told to do their best and proceeded to complete
verbal and math problems. We anticipated that action priming
would yield more correct solutions relative to inaction priming.

Method
Participants and Design
Participants were 36 students from introductory psychology
classes at the University of Florida who participated in exchange
for credit. The design was a two-cell (prime: action or inaction)
between-participants design with number of solved problems as
the main dependent variable.

Experimental Procedures
Priming task. Action or inaction was primed using a scrambledsentence task. Participants were told that the experimenters were pilot
testing an instrument to assess how people form sentences. In this
task, participants rearranged four of five words to make a coherent
sentence. Participants were given 12 scrambled sentences, 8 of which
contained action-related words (e.g., book, action, is, the, fictional) or
inaction-related words (e.g., the, tells, inaction, watch, time). The
other 4 sentences contained control fillers (e.g., shoes, feet, green,
cover, your). Participants performed this task on the computer and had
an unlimited amount of time to complete it. The primes were never
part of the sentence to be unscrambled.
Performance measure. After the priming, participants were
asked to think about how they would approach upcoming SATtype problems and were then presented with the first problem on
the computer. All participants completed 21 questions that assessed verbal ability (antonyms, sentence completion, and analogies) and quantitative ability (solving word problems and algebraic
equations). An example of these problems follows (correct answer
is italicized):
COLOR : SPECTRUM :
A. TONE : SCALE,
B. SOUND : WAVES,
C. VERSE : POEM,
D. DIMENSION : SPACE,
E. CELL : ORGANISM.

517
Results and Discussion

The number of correctly solved problems was submitted to an
ANOVA with prime as the independent variable. The analysis
revealed a main effect of prime on number of solved problems,
F(1, 34) ⫽ 5.68, p ⫽ .02, demonstrating that participants primed
with action performed better than participants primed with inaction
did (M ⫽ 12.83, SD ⫽ 1.86 vs. M ⫽ 10.78, SD ⫽ 3.15, respectively). Thus, this study confirmed that action and inaction primes
produced, respectively, higher and lower levels of cognitive output, as might be expected from the activation of action and inaction
goals.

EXPERIMENTS 6 AND 7: GOAL PROPERTIES
Experiment 6: Outcome Sensitivity
Overview
Experiments 1–5 established the presence of a general effect of
general action and inaction primes along with concept activation, in
the absence of differences in mood. Although these findings are
consistent with a goal activation interpretation, they are in no way
conclusive. For example, the effect could be due to direct motor/
cognitive activation following the concept, as has been reported in
various disciplines of psychology (Bargh, 1990; Hauk, Johnsrude,
& Pulvermuller, 2004). The two possibilities are of course not
mutually exclusive, but it is important to determine whether goal
mediation was implicated.
One defining characteristic of goals is directing people’s
behavior toward a particular outcome. Suppose that the observed active behavior following action primes is motivated by
the goal to be active. In this case, recipients of an action prime
may be able to choose a course of action that gives them the
best opportunity to be active even if this choice implies a delay
in satisfaction. Likewise, recipients of an inaction prime may be
able to choose a course of action that gives them the best
opportunity to be inactive even if this choice implies a delay of
this opportunity. For this purpose, in Experiment 6, participants
in the experimental condition were given the choice of (a)
solving a verbal or math problem for 30 s followed by 3 min of
rest versus (b) resting for 30 s followed by 3 min of solving
verbal and math problems. The choices of these participants
were compared against the choices of participants in the control
condition who, after the priming, were simply asked to choose
between 30 s of rest and 30 s of problem solving. If participants
who receive action primes are motivated to be as active as
possible, participants in the experimental condition should
choose 30 s of rest as a way of accessing 3 min of problem
solving. Correspondingly, if participants who receive inaction
primes are motivated to be as inactive as possible, they should
choose 30 s of problem solving as a way of accessing 3 min of
rest. Notably, these effects could not be explained by mere
concept activation. Activating the concept could explain the
consistent choices in the control condition but should also
produce the same bias in experimental conditions. That is, if
motor representations are activated without goals, their effects
should be apparent on the choice immediately after the prime

ALBARRACÍN ET AL.

518

(e.g., 30 s of problem solving) rather than on the later behavior
choice (e.g., 3 min of rest).2

Method
Participants
Participants were 102 male and female students at Montana
State University participating in exchange for credit. The design
was a 2 (prime: action vs. inaction) ⫻ 2 (task description: control
vs. experimental) factorial.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Experimental Procedures
Participants were primed using the word-completion task and
then were asked to choose a task to ostensibly clear working
memory. Participants were told that several tasks were available
for control purposes. In the control condition, we asked participants to clear their minds before proceeding to other tasks. With
this ostensible purpose, participants were asked to choose one of
two tasks for the upcoming 30 s. Specifically, participants read
“During this brief time, you can either wait quietly and do nothing
for about 30 seconds, or you can solve an SAT-like problem.” In
the experimental condition, participants were told to clear their
mind in one of two ways:
If you choose to wait and do nothing for about 30 seconds now, the
computer will direct you to solve SAT-like problems later, for 3
minutes.
Or
If you choose to solve an SAT-like problem for about 30 seconds now,
the computer will direct you to closing your eyes and resting later, for
3 minutes.

The order of the options to rest versus to solve problems was
counterbalanced. This factor had no effect on choices and therefore
received no further attention. Like in Experiment 1, participants’
choices were recorded and verified by observation on the part of a
research assistant. Examples of the problems we used, which were
fairly easy, follow:
Which one of the five choices makes the best comparison? LIVED is
to DEVIL as 6323 is to:
A. 2336
B. 6232
C. 3236
D. 3326
E. 6332
Which one of these five is least like the other four?
A. Horse
B. Kangaroo
C. Cow
D. Deer

problems following action primes but to rest following inaction
primes. In addition, we hypothesized that this effect would reverse
if the initial problem solving or rest was construed as a means to
attain longer times resting or problem solving, respectively. This
interactive prediction was tested by means of a logistic regression
with the choice of immediate behavior (1 ⫽ problem solving, 0 ⫽
rest) as the outcome variable and word prime (1 ⫽ action, ⫺1 ⫽
inaction) and description of the task (1 ⫽ experimental, ⫺1 ⫽
control) as predictors. The analysis yielded a significant interaction
between prime and task description, Wald ␹2(1, N ⫽ 102) ⫽ 7.73,
p ⫽ .005, a significant effect of the prime, Wald ␹2(1, N ⫽ 102) ⫽
4.55, p ⫽ .03, and a nonsignificant effect of the task description,
Wald ␹2(1, N ⫽ 102) ⫽ 1.44, p ⫽ .23. The percentage of
participants who selected the active task for the upcoming 30 s
appear in Figure 1. Contrasts were performed by coding the four
cells from 1 to 4 and using logistic regression to test for the
differences. As shown in Figure 1, in the control condition, participants were more likely to choose the initial active task when
they were primed with action rather than with inaction, p for
difference ⬍ .019. In contrast, in the experimental condition,
participants were more likely to choose the initial active task when
they were primed with inaction rather than with action, p for
difference ⬍ .006.
In conclusion, Experiment 6 provided evidence that the effects
observed in Experiments 1–5 are due to the influence of general
goals. Whereas control participants primed with action (vs. inaction) chose active immediate tasks, experimental participants
primed with action (vs. inaction) chose to be inactive initially to
participate in a longer subsequent active task. This reversed effect
of the primes in experimental conditions can be plausibly explained by goal mediation. After all, goals do not produce behavior
in a blind fashion but with direction toward maximizing a particular outcome. In contrast, mere concept activation is unable to
explain this sensitivity to the outcome of one’s behavioral choices.

Experiment 7: Effect of Satisfaction
Overview
Like Experiment 6, Experiment 7 was designed to determine
whether goals are implicated in the effects of the action and
inaction primes obtained in Experiments 1–5. Participants were
first primed with action, control, or inaction words and then
engaged in a brief randomly assigned task that could be either
active (doodling) or inactive (resting). After the task, participants
read a text and wrote down their thoughts about it. A greater
number of listed thoughts was taken as an indication of greater
cognitive activity and should be greater when participants have an
action goal rather than when they have an inaction goal.
The inclusion of the task was designed to test whether the
effects of the primes are discontinued when people perform behaviors that can satisfy the goal (Bargh et al., 2001; Kruglanski et
al., 2002; Moskowitz et al., 2004). An action goal should be

E. Donkey

Results and Discussion
We predicted that control participants would display the same
pattern as the participants from Experiment 1, choosing to solve

2
As another possibility, if conceptual priming operates, the primes may
produce no noticeable effects. That is, the concepts of action and inaction
appear in both choices of brief rest followed by longer problem solving as
well as brief problem solving followed by longer rest. Hence, both choices
may be selected in equal proportions.

74
69
64
59
54
49
44
39
34
29
24

Action p
prime
Inaction prime

Control condition

Experimental
condition

Figure 1. Effects of primes on the percentage of participants who chose
to problem solve and how the choice was described (experimental vs.
control): Experiment 6.

present when participants were primed with action and had no
opportunity to be active, and an inaction goal should be activated
when participants were primed with inaction and had no opportunity to be inactive. In contrast, if the effects of the primes are goal
mediated, action and inaction primes followed by an immediate
prime-consistent task should have a different effect. In particular,
these satisfied action goals should yield less activity than would
unsatisfied action goals, and satisfied inaction goals should yield
more activity than would unsatisfied inaction goals. Whether satisfied goals return to baseline level of efforts (i.e., no different
from control-prime conditions) is an empirical question. Satisfied
action goals may either produce the same effort as control conditions, more effort than control conditions, or less effort than
control conditions. All these possibilities would indicate that goal
satisfaction decreased striving toward the desired outcome. Finding the same or more effort would indicate mere deactivation of
the goal, whereas less effort would indicate the sort of rebound
effect that is occasionally observed in studies of goal satisfaction
(Marsh et al., 1998).

Method
Participants in this study were primed with action words, control
words, or inaction words using the word-completion task used
previously. At that time, half of the participants were asked to take
a break and relax with their eyes closed, whereas the other half was
asked to doodle or fold a piece of paper into an airplane. If goals
are at stake, relaxing would satisfy inaction goals but not action
goals, whereas doodling/folding would satisfy action goals but not
inaction goals. Following the manipulation of goal satisfaction, all
participants received a passage about vegetarianism and listed their
thoughts about the text.

Participants and Design
Participants were 98 students at the University of Florida who
participated in exchange for credit in an introductory psychology
class. The design was a 3 (prime: action, control, or inaction) ⫻ 2
(task: active vs. inactive) factorial.

Procedures and Measures
We introduced the action, control, and inaction primes as part of
the previously used word-completion task. Then, we introduced

519

the manipulated active or inactive task and gave participants a text
to read.
Active and inactive task. After the word-completion task, we
explained to participants that there would be a 2-min break with
the ostensible objective of clearing their mind. Participants in
inactive-task conditions received instructions to rest, closing their
eyes and waiting to proceed after the 2 min elapsed. In contrast,
participants in active-task conditions were asked to engage in
physical movement. Specifically, we indicated that a piece of
paper had been provided at their workstations to facilitate movement and that they should fold it into a paper airplane or doodle on
the paper. We requested that they engage in the task silently until
the computer proceeded to the next screen after 2 min passed.
Text reading. The informational passage about vegetarianism
contained approximately 500 words and included scientific evidence about the effects of vegetarianism. Participants read the text at
their own pace and were then asked to list their thoughts about it.
Thought listing. After reading the text, participants received
instructions to type the thoughts they had while reading the text on
a computer. For analyses, we counted the number of thoughts
listed by each participant.

Results
We used an ANOVA to examine the number of listed thoughts
as a function of the word primes and assignment to either active or
inactive tasks. This analysis revealed a significant two-way interaction between prime and task, F(2, 92) ⫽ 4.36, p ⫽ .02, and a
significant effect of task, F(1, 92) ⫽ 7.57, p ⫽ .007, along with
nonsignificant effects of prime, F(2, 92) ⫽ 1.88, ns. The mean
numbers of thoughts in each cell appear in Figure 2 and supported
a goal-mediation interpretation.
As shown in Figure 2, in conditions in which the task could not
have satisfied a prime-elicited goal, the pattern of effects replicated
the earlier experiments. That is, action primes followed by an
inactive task produced a greater number of thoughts about the text
than did inaction primes followed by an active task (M ⫽ 6.94,
SD ⫽ 3.46 vs. M ⫽ 3.36, SD ⫽ 0.81, respectively; p for contrast ⫽
.001), and both differed significantly from the control conditions
(for active task: M ⫽ 5.00, SD ⫽ 2.24; for inactive task: M ⫽ 4.17,
SD ⫽ 2.04; p for contrasts ⫽ .02 in each case). This finding
replicates the results from our prior experiments in which the goals

Number o
N
of Though
hts about Text

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Percent Choosing Problem Solving
P
du
uring the Next 30 s

GENERAL ACTION AND INACTION GOALS

8
7.5
7
6.5
6

Action prime
Control prime
Inaction prime

5.5
5
4.5
4
3.5
3
Active task

Inactive task

Figure 2. Effects of primes and task introduced to produce conditions
with and without goal satisfaction: Experiment 7.

ALBARRACÍN ET AL.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

520

presumably stimulated by the primes induced different levels of
motor and cognitive output.
Experiment 7 also provided evidence concerning the role of
satisfaction. With respect to satisfying inaction goals, inaction
primes followed by active tasks yielded a smaller number of
thoughts than did inaction primes followed by inactive tasks (M ⫽
3.36, SD ⫽ 0.81 vs. M ⫽ 6.50, SD ⫽ 2.80, respectively; p for
contrast ⫽ .006). This mean difference implies that satisfying an
inaction goal decreased its effect, resulting in higher levels of
activity. A similar decrease of the effect of the primes was present
for the satisfaction of action goals. Action primes followed by
inactive tasks yielded a larger number of thoughts than did action
primes followed by active tasks (M ⫽ 6.94, SD ⫽ 3.46 vs. M ⫽
4.58, SD ⫽ 2.76, respectively; p for contrast ⫽ .02). Again, then,
the expected decrease in the influence of the action goal following
satisfaction was verified.
It is also interesting to compare the outcomes of satisfied action
goals with those of unsatisfied inaction goals and control primes,
as well as those of satisfied inaction goals with those of unsatisfied
action goals and control primes. Action primes followed by an
active task (satisfied action goals: M ⫽ 4.58, SD ⫽ 2.76) still
yielded a larger number of thoughts than did inaction primes
followed by an active task (M ⫽ 3.36, SD ⫽ 0.81, p for contrast ⫽
.05) and than did control conditions ( p for contrast ⫽ .02). This
difference suggests that participants in satisfied action goals were
still more active than were those with unsatisfied inaction goals. In
contrast, satisfying an inaction goal led to a similar level of activity
as not satisfying an action goal (M ⫽ 6.50, SD ⫽ 2.80 vs. M ⫽
6.94, SD ⫽ 3.46, respectively; p for contrast ⫽ .72), and both of
these conditions had higher means than the average of the control
conditions did (M ⫽ 4.58, SD ⫽ 2.76, p for contrast ⫽ .001). This
latter finding suggests that satisfying inaction goals produced
effects similar to those of unsatisfied action goals.

Discussion
To summarize, we reasoned that the effect of action and inaction
goals should decrease or cease if a satisfaction opportunity arises.
Consistent with this possibility, action, control, and inaction
primes had corresponding influences on the number of thoughts
elicited during text reading when there could be no prior satisfaction of action or inaction goals. That is, unsatisfied action goals
produced the highest number of thoughts, followed by control
conditions and then by unsatisfied inaction goals. Critical to our
analysis, however, the introduction of a prime-consistent task
following the prime either reduced or eliminated the effects of the
goals. This finding strongly supports the contention that the findings in Experiments 1–5 can be goal mediated.

GENERAL DISCUSSION
Although variations in overall activity are present in all species
(Dumville et al., 2006; Roffwarg, Muzio, & Dement, 1966; Sears,
2005; Tsiouris, 2005), in humans this regulation is unlikely to be
left up to biology alone. Some existing data suggest historical
increases in human activity levels that are likely due to social and
cultural factors. In the last few decades, Americans have been
sleeping less (National Sleep Foundation, 2005), obesity rates have
doubled (Centers for Disease Control, 2005), and the average

American-family debt (along with the associated consumerism)
has crept up (Federal Reserve, 2005).
To the best of our knowledge, the present article is the first to
propose a mechanism that may underlie these types of trends.
Specifically, we defined and tested the effects and operation of
general action and inaction goals. These goals have an end state of
either high or low motor and cognitive output, respectively, exert
effects on motor and cognitive focal behaviors, and their effects
decrease once the goals are satisfied. In the coming sections, we
discuss the main findings and implications for future research.

Present Findings
The studies in this article are a first demonstration of the
effects of general action and inaction goals in a relatively
simple context: when available options entail activity versus
rest (e.g., folding a piece of paper vs. resting) or more or less of
the same behavior (e.g., learning more or less). Specifically, we
activated goals with words that were broadly associated with
action and inaction. These general goals then influenced responses that had no specific connection with the words that
primed the goals. Sometimes these responses were trivial and
not particularly conscientious, such as when participants folded
a piece of paper (Experiment 1). Other times, these behaviors
were important and conscientious, such as when participants
solved intellectual problems (Experiments 4 and 5).
In preparation for Experiment 1, we used a lexical decision task
to examine corresponding concept activation and ruled out mood
effects. Furthermore, the presence of goals as an underlying mechanism was examined by assessing two types of effects that cannot
derive from mere conceptual priming. First, as goals drive behavior with a particular outcome in mind, individuals with action and
inaction goals should choose options that allow them to be maximally or minimally active, even when the immediate behavioral
means to this outcome is not. Specifically, participants were asked
to choose between a brief activity followed by a longer inactivity
or a brief inactivity followed by a longer activity. Findings indicated that participants primed with action chose the brief inactive
period followed by the longer active behavior, whereas those
primed with inaction chose the brief active period followed by the
longer inactive behavior. Thus, although control participants who
were asked to choose between two immediate behaviors chose
behaviors that were consistent with the prime, in the more complex
choice situations, participants were sensitive to the overall outcome. This finding cannot be explained by the mere activation of
a concept.
In addition, in line with past research on the cognitive and
motivational properties of goals (see Chartrand & Bargh, 2002;
Förster et al., 2005; Kruglanski et al., 2002), we found that the
effects of priming action and inaction decreased when a goalsatisfying task was executed. Specifically, action and inaction
primes produced, respectively, larger and smaller numbers of
thoughts in response to a written text. However, the effect of action
primes decreased when participants were asked to doodle before
processing the written text, and the effect of inaction primes was
reversed when participants were asked to rest before processing
the text. This pattern may result from a Zeigarnik (1967) type of
effect (see Förster et al., 2005). That is, rather than merely pro-

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

GENERAL ACTION AND INACTION GOALS

ducing deactivation of goals, satisfaction of the inaction goal
produced a clear push towards action.
The finding that the effects of both action and inaction primes
are sensitive to both potential outcomes and satisfaction is important for reasons other than ruling out conceptual priming. At first
sight, the effects of action/inaction priming might be construed as
an influencing motivation, with action primes producing high
motivation and inaction primes producing low motivation. If this
hypothesis were plausible, one should observe goal mediation only
for action-prime conditions, presumably the ones in which motivation would be strong. However, the results from Experiments 6
and 7 highlight that both action and inaction primes produced
commitment of resources to achieve an end even when the ends
differed. That is, both action and inaction goals entail comparable
motivation, although the end state individuals are motivated to
achieve varies.

Future Directions
This work has several implications for future research. Some
implications concern the effects of action and inaction goals when
there is more than one focal behavior that can satisfy the same
general goal. Other directions include studying cross-cultural and
individual differences in these general goals.

Selecting Different Viable Behaviors to Satisfy Action and
Inaction Goals
Future research should address the effects of general action and
inaction goals when people enact or consider enacting more than
one specific behavior. For example, individuals may intend to both
cook a meal and check their children’s homework, or to exercise,
watch television, and eat. In this case, the selection of a specific
means to goal satisfaction should depend on the perceived ease and
desirability of each behavior (Ajzen & Fishbein, 2005). Action
goals may prompt selection of active behaviors but which active
behavior to choose should depend on other factors (e.g., salience,
desirability, and the operation and strength of additional goals).
Similar considerations arise with respect to well-learned, dominant behaviors as opposed to new behaviors. If only a new
behavior is focal, action goals should facilitate learning that behavior. However, action (vs. inaction) goals may also facilitate the
application of a previously learned routine when such routines are
available. Importantly, dominant responses may emerge when
impulsive individuals are primed with action, even when these
responses are prone to error. Furthermore, by activating dominant
responses, action (vs. inaction) goals may sometimes reduce learning of new procedures. In any event, the conditions under which
action and inaction goals trigger stability and change in behavior
deserve research attention in the future.
The effects of action and inaction goals on attitude change and
personality expression may also be analyzed in the future. For
example, various forms of processing related to persuasive communications may be respectively enhanced and reduced by action
and inaction goals. In addition, action and inaction goals may
influence the expression of personality tendencies in a variety of
contexts. For instance, activating a general action goal may increase promotion and prevention strategies (see Higgins, 1997)
among chronically high-promotion and high-prevention people.

521

As another example, action goals may trigger different behavioral
choices for high-locomotion and high-assessment individuals
(Kruglanski et al., 2000), such that locomotors may choose motor
activities and assessors may choose cognitive activities. Similarly,
chronic behavioral activation and inhibition (Carver & White,
1994) and action/state orientation (Kuhl, 1985) may determine
whether effective planning or rumination predominate in response
to action goals.

Relations to Brain Responses
General action and inaction both depend on activation and
inhibition at the neural level (J. L. McClelland & Rumelhardt,
1986). Depending on what focal behavior is used to pursue an
action goal, the goal may require inhibition, release of inhibition,
or activation. One may need to inhibit perceptual functions for
executive control processes to operate and release inhibition of
motor behavior to satisfy general action goals by means of movement. By the same token, inaction may require inhibition of
movement or activation of mental strategies (e.g., counting sheep)
that promote inaction before a state of inaction is attained. In any
case, the excitatory and inhibitory outcomes of action and inaction
concepts may deserve attention in the future.

Action Versus Perception
One interesting aspect of Experiment 3 is that action and inaction primes may have modulated not only motor output but also
perception of the videotaped behavior. For example, participants
may have become more sensitive to the behaviors of the target
person without any active attempt to segment these behaviors or
indicate this segmentation by pressing the computer space bar. In
the future, general action and perception could be primed to see if
the same or different effects emerge. As perception and action are
linked at the neurofunctional level (see Rizzolatti, Fogassi, &
Gallese, 2001), priming perception and action may both increase
perception, mimicry, and adoption of the goals of others (for a
review of these phenomena, see Dijksterhuis, Chartrand, & Aarts,
2007). Future research should examine these possibilities.

Achievement and Flexibility Priming
Establishing that general action and inaction goals can be activated in the laboratory raises the question of whether these goals
have been activated in prior studies. For example, priming
achievement and flexibility has demonstrated effects on a variety
of tasks (see Bargh et al., 2001; Hassin, 2007; Levesque & Pellitier, 2003), raising the possibility that more general action tendencies were involved. The extent to which general action goals are at
stake in these situations could be established through future systematic research. For example, instead of using a single behavior
as the outcome measure, the effects of achievement might be
established as high engagement in achievement-relevant behaviors
but low engagement in achievement-irrelevant behaviors. More
generally, however, the prior effects of achievement and flexibility
represent instances of general behavioral effects akin to the ones
demonstrated in this article.

ALBARRACÍN ET AL.

522

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Cross-Cultural, Cross-Temporal, and Cross-Individual
Variability in Action and Inaction Goals
Some people are active to the point of having manic episodes,
whereas others lack interest in initiating activities (American Psychiatric Association, 2005). The observed effects of general action
and inaction primes model these natural variations in general
levels of activity.
If general action and inaction goals can yield patterns comparable to natural variations in overall activity levels, these goals
may underlie behavioral differences in the real world. For instance,
mania and impulsivity may correlate positively with favorable
attitudes about and goals of general action. These same manifestations may correlate negatively with favorable attitudes about and
goals of general inaction. Correspondingly, depression may correlate negatively with favorable attitudes about and goals of general
action but positively with favorable attitudes about and goals of
general inaction. In the future, these associations could be examined across individuals, regions within countries, and regions
around the globe.
General action and inaction goals may also be linked to structural factors and long-standing beliefs in a community. As one
example, the generation of excess capital in the Modern Era (in
Europe: years 1453–1789) may have facilitated activities that were
previously impossible. An increase in the sheer number of activities may have led to inferences that activity is desirable irrespective of the activity. As another example, Buddhist beliefs imply
that life is inherently imperfect and that attempts to improve it
backfire. As a result, these beliefs may stimulate general goals of
inaction. If these hypotheses are plausible, across nations, a low
gross national product and a Buddhist religion may result in more
sleep, less illegal drug use, reduced caffeine consumption, and
greater incidence of depression. Future archival analyses may
examine these predictions.

Closing Note
This research is the first to induce general action and inaction
goals to control behaviors without controlling the specific quality
of those behaviors. Because these aspects are essential for effective
regulation of individual and social systems, our findings have the
potential to illuminate a significant range of human experiences.
We hope that these data, which are the beginning of this line of
research, will stimulate exciting directions in the future.

References
Ajzen, I., & Fishbein, M. (2005). The influence of attitudes on behavior. In
D. Albarracı́n, B. T. Johnson, & M. P. Zanna (Eds.), The handbook of
attitudes (pp. 173–221). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
American Psychiatric Association. (2005). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders (4th ed., text revision). Washington, DC: Author.
Anderson, M. (1992). Intelligence and development: A cognitive theory.
Oxford, England: Blackwell.
Atkinson, J. W., & Birch, D. (1970). The dynamics of action. Oxford,
England: Wiley.
The Avalon Project. (2007). Foreign relations of the United States: 1961–
1963. Cuban missile crisis and aftermath. Retrieved August 1, 2007,
from http://www.yale.edu/lawweb/avalon/diplomacy/forrel/cuba/
cubamenu.htm

Bandura, A. (1989). Self-regulation of motivation and action through
internal standards and goal systems. In L. A. Pervin (Ed.), Goal
concepts in personality and social psychology (pp. 19 – 86). Hillsdale,
NJ: Erlbaum.
Bargh, J. A. (1990). Auto-motives: Preconscious determinants of social
interaction. In E. T. Higgins & R. M. Sorrentino (Eds.), Handbook of
motivation and cognition (pp. 93–130). New York: Guilford.
Bargh, J. A., & Chartrand, T. L. (1999). The unbearable automaticity of
being. American Psychologist, 54, 462– 479.
Bargh, J. A., & Chartrand, T. L. (2000). The mind in the middle: A
practical guide to priming and automaticity research. In H. T. Reis &
C. M. Judd (Eds.), Handbook of research methods in social and personality psychology (pp. 253–285). New York: Cambridge University
Press.
Bargh, J. A., Gollwitzer, P. M., Lee-Chai, A., Barndollar, K., & Trötschel,
R. (2001). The automated will: Nonconscious activation and pursuit of
behavioral goals. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 81,
1014 –1027.
Barratt, E. S. (1985). Impulsiveness defined within a systems model of
personality. In E. O. Speilgurger & J. N. Butcher (Eds.), Advances in
personality assessment (pp. 113–132). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Baum, A. E., Hamshere, M., Green, E., Cichon, S., Rietschel, M., Noethen,
M. M., et al. (2008). Meta-analysis of two genome-wide association
studies of bipolar disorder reveals important points of agreement. Molecular Psychiatry, 13, 466 – 467.
Carver, C. S., & White, T. L. (1994). Behavioral inhibition, behavioral
activation, and affective responses to impending reward and punishment:
The BIS/BAS scales. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 67,
319 –333.
Centers for Disease Control. (2005). Prevalence of overweight among
children and adolescents: United States, 2003–2004. Retrieved September 1, 2005, from http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/products/pubs/pubd/hestats/
overweight/overwght_child_03.htm
Chartrand, T. L., & Bargh, J. A. (2002). Nonconscious motivations: Their
activation, operation, and consequences. In A. Tesser, D. A. Stapel, & J. V.
Wood (Eds.), Self and motivation: Emerging psychological perspectives
(pp. 13– 41). Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
Dijksterhuis, A., Chartrand, T. L., & Aarts, H. (2007). Effects of priming
and perception on social behavior and goal pursuit. In J. Bargh (Ed.),
Social psychology and the unconscious: The automaticity of higher
mental processes. Frontiers of social psychology (pp. 51–131). New
York: Psychology Press.
Dumville, J. C., Miles, J. N. V., Porthouse, J., Cockayne, S., Saxon, L., &
King, C. (2006). Can vitamin D supplementation prevent winter-time
blues? A randomised trial among older women. Journal of Nutrition,
Health & Aging, 10, 151–153.
Federal Reserve. (2005). Statistical release G19. Retrieved September 1,
2005, from http://federalreserve.gov/releases/g19/
Ferguson, M. J., & Bargh, J. A. (2004). Liking is for doing: The effects of
goal pursuit on automatic evaluation. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 87, 557–572.
Fishbein, M., & Ajzen, I. (1975). Belief attitude, intention and behavior.
Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.
Fiske, S. T., & Taylor, S. E. (1991). Social cognition (2nd ed.). New York:
McGraw-Hill.
Förster, J., Liberman, N., & Higgins, E. T. (2005). Accessibility from
active and fulfilled goals. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology,
41, 220 –239.
Handley, I. M., & Lassiter, G. D. (2002). Mood and information processing: When happy and sad look the same. Motivation and Emotion, 26,
223–255.
Hassin, R. (2007). Nonconscious control and working memory. In J. Bargh
(Ed.), Social psychology and the unconscious: The automaticity of

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

GENERAL ACTION AND INACTION GOALS
higher mental processes. Frontiers of social psychology (pp. 196 –222).
New York: Psychology Press.
Hauk, O., Johnsrude, I., & Pulvermuller, F. (2004). Somatotopic representation of action words in human motor and premotor cortex. Neuron, 41,
301–307.
Heekeren, H. R., Marrett, S., Ruff, D. A., Bandettini, P. A., & Ungerleider,
L. G. (2006). Involvement of human left dorsolateral prefrontal cortex in
perceptual decision making is independent of response modality. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, USA, 103, 10023–10028.
Higgins, E. T. (1997). Beyond pleasure and pain. American Psychologist,
52, 1280 –1300.
Kawada, C. L. K., Oettingen, G., Gollwitzer, P. M., & Bargh, J. A. (2004).
The projection of implicit and explicit goals. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 86, 545–559.
Kiss, G. R., Armstrong, C., Milroy, R., & Piper, J. (1973). An associative
thesaurus of English and its computer analysis. In A. J. Aitken, R. W.
Bailey, & N. Hamilton-Smith (Eds.), The computer and literary studies
(pp. 153–165). Edinburgh, Scotland: University Press.
Kruglanski, A. W., Shah, J. Y., Fishbach, A., Friedman, R., Chun, W. Y.,
& Sleeth-Keppler, D. (2002). A theory of goal systems. In M. P. Zanna
(Ed.), Advances in experimental social psychology (Vol. 43, pp. 331–
378). San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Kruglanski, A. W., Thompson, E. P., Higgins, E. T., Atash, M. N., Pierro,
A., Shah, J. Y., & Spiegel, S. (2000). To do the right thing! or to just do
it!: Locomotion and assessment as distinct self-regulatory imperatives.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 79, 793– 815.
Kuhl, J. (1985). Volitional mediators of cognition-behavior consistency:
Self-regulatory processes and action and state orientation. In J. Kuhl &
J. Beckmann (Eds.), Action control: From cognition to behavior (pp.
101–128). New York: Springer-Verlag.
Lassiter, G. D., Briggs, M. A., & Bowman, R. E. (1991). Need for
cognition and the perception of ongoing behavior. Personality and
Social Psychology Bulletin, 17, 156 –160.
Lassiter, G. D., Geers, A. L., & Apple, K. J. (2002). Communication set
and the perception of ongoing behavior. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 28, 158 –171.
Lassiter, G. D., Stone, J. I., & Rogers, S. L. (1988). Memorial consequences of variation in behavior perception. Journal of Experimental
Social Psychology, 24, 222–239.
Lawrence, M., Thongprasert, K., & Durnin, J. V. (1988). Between-group
differences in basal metabolic rates: An analysis of data collected in
Scotland, the Gambia and Thailand. European Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 42, 877– 891.
Levesque, C. S., & Pellitier, L. G. (2003). On the investigation of primed
and chronic autonomous and heteronomous motivational orientations.
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 29, 1570 –1584.
Lewin, K. (1935). A dynamic theory of personality. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Marsh, R. L., Hicks, J. L., & Bink, M. L. (1998). Activation of completed,
uncompleted, and partially completed intentions. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 24, 350 –361.
McClelland, D. C., Atkinson, J. W., Clark, R. A., & Lowell, E. L. (1953).
The achievement motive. New York: Appleton-Century-Crofts.

523

McClelland, J. L., & Rumelhardt, D. E. (1986). Parallel distributed processing: Explorations in the micro-structure of cognition (Vols. 1 & 2).
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Moskowitz, G. B., Li, P., & Kirk, E. R. (2004). The implicit volition
model: On the preconscious regulation of temporarily adopted goals. In
M. P. Zanna (Ed.), Advances in experimental social psychology (Vol. 34,
pp. 317– 414). San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
National Sleep Foundation. (2005). 2005 sleep in America poll. Retrieved
June 10, 2007, from http://www.sleep-solutions.com/phys/education/
NSF_2005_Sleep_in_America_Poll_Results.htm
Pervin, L. A. (1983). The stasis and flow of behavior: Toward a theory of
goals. In M. M. Page (Ed.), Personality: Current theory and research.
Nebraska symposium on motivation (Vol. 30, pp. 1–53). Lincoln, NE:
University of Nebraska Press.
Pinkerton, S. (1997). How the mind works. New York: Norton.
Powers, W. T. (1973). Behavior: The control of perception. Chicago:
Aldine.
Powers, W. T. (1978). Quantitative analysis of purposive systems: Some
spadework at the foundations of scientific psychology. Psychological
Review, 85, 417– 435.
Ratcliff, J. J., Lassiter, G. D., Markman, K. D., Patterson, S. M., Dauster,
S., Munhall, P. J., et al. (2004). Prejudice alters the observation of
ongoing behavior. Unpublished manuscript, Ohio University, Athens.
Rizzolatti, G., Fogassi, L., & Gallese, V. (2001). Neuropsychological
mechanisms underlying the understanding and imitation of action. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 2, 661– 670.
Roese, N. J., Hur, T., & Pennington, G. L. (1999). Counterfactual thinking
and regulatory focus: Implications for action versus inaction and sufficiency versus necessity. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
77, 1109 –1120.
Roffwarg, H. P., Muzio, J. N., & Dement, W. C. (1966, April 29).
Ontogenetic development of the human sleep-dream cycle. Science, 152,
604 – 619.
Sears, M. W. (2005). Resting metabolic expenditure as a potential source
of variation in growth rates of the sagebrush lizard. Comparative Biochemistry & Physiology Part A: Molecular & Integrative Physiology,
140, 171–177.
Tsiouris, J. A. (2005). Metabolic depression in hibernation and major
depression: An explanatory theory and an animal model of depression.
Medical Hypotheses, 65, 829 – 840.
Wright, R. A., & Brehm, J. W. (1989). Energization and goal attractiveness. In L. A. Pervin (Ed.), Goal concepts in personality and social
psychology (pp. 169 –210). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Zeigarnik, B. (1967). On finished and unfinished tasks. In W. D. Ellis
(Ed.), A sourcebook of gestalt psychology (pp. 300 –304). New York:
Humanities Press.

Received March 19, 2006
Revision received December 7, 2007
Accepted December 11, 2007 䡲

