Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition
2008, Vol. 34, No. 1, 237–242

Copyright 2008 by the American Psychological Association
0278-7393/08/$12.00 DOI: 10.1037/0278-7393.34.1.237

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

The Intermixed–Blocked Effect in Human Perceptual Learning Is Not the
Consequence of Trial Spacing
Chris Mitchell and Scott Nash

Geoffrey Hall

University of New South Wales

University of York

A robust finding in humans and animals is that intermixed exposure to 2 similar stimuli (AX/BX) results
in better discriminability of those stimuli on test than does exposure to 2 equally similar stimuli in 2
separate blocks (CX_DX)—the intermixed– blocked effect. This intermixed– blocked effect may be an
example of the superiority of spaced over massed practice; in the intermixed, but not the blocked exposure
regime, each presentation of a given stimulus (e.g., AX) is separated from the next by the presentation of its
partner (BX). Two experiments with human participants replicated the intermixed– blocked effect and showed
that the effect was not due to the spacing of exposure trials. A mechanism for the intermixed– blocked effect
is proposed, which combines theories from associative learning and memory.
Keywords: perceptual learning, spaced practice, memory, discrimination

The intermixed– blocked effect lends support to Gibson’s (1969)
argument that stimulus comparison is critical in perceptual learning;
there is more opportunity to compare AX and BX in the intermixed
condition than there is in the blocked preexposure condition.
The intermixed and blocked preexposure conditions differ, however, not only in terms of the opportunity they allow for participants to compare AX and BX. They also differ with respect to the
temporal spacing of trials. On the intermixed schedule, each AX
presentation is separated by a presentation of BX. On the blocked
schedule, stimulus presentations are consecutive. Thus, the
intermixed– blocked effect might not be a consequence of the
greater opportunity to compare the two stimuli on the intermixed
schedule but might instead be an example of the advantage of
spaced over massed practice (Ebbinghaus, 1885/1964). Specifically, intermixed preexposure might allow better discrimination of
AX and BX because spaced practice produces better memory for
AX and BX. Such a prediction can be derived from standard
theories of the massed–spaced effect. One prominent theory supposes that when trials are spaced, more time is available for the
events to “consolidate” into long-term memory (Wickelgren,
1972). Another possibility is that encoding conditions may vary
more when the presentations are distributed across time. This
would create a wider range of potential retrieval cues and increase
the probability that one of the memory traces will be retrieved on
test (e.g., Glenberg, 1979). We aimed to test this general hypothesis in the present experiments by controlling for the effects of
spaced practice and specifically for the potential effects of consolidation and encoding variability.

Perceptual learning refers to the change in the way that a
stimulus is perceived as a consequence of exposure to that stimulus. For example, mere exposure to two very similar stimuli can
render those stimuli more distinct (Gibson & Walk, 1956). This
phenomenon is particularly interesting to learning theorists because it is not straightforwardly explained in terms of the known
principles of associative learning. In fact, Gibson (1969) has
argued that this form of learning is the opposite of associative
learning. She termed the phenomenon differentiation. She argued
that differentiation occurs because, during preexposure, the animal
has the opportunity to compare the stimuli and extract (or pay
greater attention to) the unique features.
Any two similar stimuli can be described as AX and BX; they
share common X features but they also possess features that are
unique to each stimulus, A and B. Thus, exposure to AX and BX
appears to increase the effectiveness of A and B at the expense of
X, rendering the two stimuli more distinct. One very important
determinant of this perceptual learning effect, first shown in experiments with animals (originally by Honey, Bateson, & Horn,
1994, with chicks; subsequently by Symonds & Hall, 1995, with
rats), is that intermixed preexposure (i.e., a trial sequence such as
AX BX AX BX. . .) is much more effective than preexposure, in
which the stimuli are presented in separate blocks of trials (e.g.,
AX AX . . . BX BX . . .). This is referred to as the intermixed–
blocked effect. It has since been shown to occur in human flavor
discrimination (Dwyer, Hodder, & Honey, 2004) and in human
visual discrimination (Lavis & Mitchell, 2006). A similar effect
(termed contextual interference) is also seen in the verbal learning
(Battig, 1972) and motor learning (Shea & Morgan, 1979) literatures.

Experiment 1
Chris Mitchell and Scott Nash, School of Psychology, University of
New South Wales, Sydney, Australia; Geoffrey Hall, Department of Psychology, University of York, York, United Kingdom.
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Chris
Mitchell, School of Psychology, University of New South Wales, Mathews
Building, Sydney, New South Wales 2052, Australia. E-mail:
chris.mitchell@unsw.edu.au

This experiment takes as a starting point Lavis and Mitchell’s
(2006) demonstration of the intermixed– blocked effect using visual stimuli in humans. Examples of the stimuli, complex and very
similar checkerboards, are presented in Figure 1. Using stimuli of
this sort, Lavis and Mitchell showed that discrimination, as assessed by a same– different test procedure, was enhanced after
237

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

238

BRIEF REPORTS

preexposure, in which the stimuli were presented on an intermixed
schedule (AX/BX). Comparison was made with the performance
shown to other stimuli (CX and DX) that were preexposed in
separate blocks of trials. In that experiment, the spacing of trials
was uniform, which meant that the interval between successive
presentations of AX (or of BX) was twice that separating successive presentations of CX (or of DX). In this experiment we
repeated the AX/BX preexposure condition and also presented CX
in a separate block of trials. In this blocked condition, stimulus
presentations were massed. However, presentations of a second
blocked stimulus, DX, were separated by an interval corresponding to one stimulus presentation. Thus, the spacing of DX presentations was equivalent to the spacing of AX (and BX) presentations. On the test trials that followed preexposure, the participants
were required to discriminate each of the compound cues (AX,
BX, CX, and DX) from X. We predicted that if superior performance following intermixed preexposure (AX/BX) is due to temporal spacing alone, then the DX stimulus in the spaced condition
would be easily discriminated from the common X cue on test.

Figure 1. Stimuli AX–DX and X. The lowest checkerboard is X, the
common element. In each of the remaining checkerboards appears a unique
feature (A–D) surrounded by a heavy black line that distinguishes that
checkerboard from X. This outline was not present during the experiment.

Method
Participants. The participants were 24 undergraduate students
from the University of New South Wales who volunteered for the
experiment in return for course credit.
Apparatus and stimuli. Stimuli were 20 ⫻ 20 colored checkerboards (see Figure 1). The common X element was created by
coloring 156 of the 400 squares green, red, yellow, purple, or blue.
The remaining background squares were colored gray. The unique
features A, B, C, and D were added by changing groups of six
adjacent gray squares to one of the brighter colors. The added
unique features differed both in color and in location on the
checkerboard. The location of a given unique feature was constant
across exposures. The area of the screen around the checkerboard
was the same gray color as the gray squares of the checkerboard.
A thick black border separated the checkerboard from the background. The individual squares within the checkerboard had no
borders. The stimuli were presented on a 17 in. (43.18 cm) computer monitor and were approximately 8-cm square. Inquisit, Version 1.32 (Millisecond Software, Seattle, WA) was used to control
stimulus presentation on an IBM-compatible PC.
Design and procedure. There were three phases of preexposure. In the intermixed phase, presentations of AX alternated with
presentations of BX. In the blocked phase, all presentations of CX
were given consecutively, and in the spaced phase all presentations
of DX were given sequentially, but a temporal delay was inserted
between each trial. The order of these three phases was counterbalanced across participants. Allocation of the stimuli shown in
Figure 1 to conditions was counterbalanced such that each stimulus was presented equally as often in the intermixed, blocked, and
spaced conditions.
At the start of the experiment, participants were seated approximately 60 cm from the computer monitor and were presented with
the instructions on the screen. They were told to pay attention to
the stimuli, that any stimulus differences they detected would be
useful later in the experiment, and to press the space bar to proceed
from one trial to the next. During the preexposure phase, each
stimulus was displayed 60 times, for a duration of 470 ms on each
occasion. Each individual stimulus presentation, in both the
blocked and intermixed phases, was followed by a blank gray
screen during which participants made their space bar presses. In
fact, the following trial was initiated after 2,000 ms whether a
press was made or not. In the spaced condition, the interstimulus
interval was increased to 4,470 ms. This is the equivalent of the
delay created between each AX presentation by the presentation of
BX on alternate trials (and vice versa) in the intermixed condition.
At the completion of the preexposure phase, participants were
informed that in a second phase, they would be presented with
pairs of checkerboards, one pair at a time. They were told to press
the A key if these two stimuli appeared to be the same, and the 5
key on the number pad if the stimuli appeared to be different. A
reminder about which keys to press remained on the screen
throughout the test period. Participants were also told not to spend
too long on each judgment.
There were six types of test trial: (1) intermixed different, in
which AX and X (or BX and X) were presented; (2) intermixed
same, in which AX and AX (or BX and BX) were presented; (3)
blocked different, in which CX and X were presented; (4) blocked
same, in which CX and CX were presented; (5) spaced different,

BRIEF REPORTS

However, there appears to be no difference between the three
conditions on the same trials. These observations were tested using
three contrasts that compared all combinations of the three conditions. A Bonferroni adjustment was made to the F critical to
correct for the fact that these comparisons are nonorthogonal.
Performance to AX and BX (the intermixed condition) was better
than that to CX (the blocked condition), F(1, 23) ⫽ 7.66, MSE ⫽
0.045. This contrast interacted with the test trial type, F(1, 23) ⫽
10.33, MSE ⫽ 0.059, and simple effects analyses revealed an
intermixed– blocked effect on different test trials, F(1, 23) ⫽ 9.65,
MSE ⫽ 0.12, but not on same test trials (F ⬍ 1). This result
replicates the intermixed– blocked effect shown by Lavis and
Mitchell (2006). The intermixed condition also produced better
performance than did the spaced condition, F(1, 47) ⫽ 8.20,
MSE ⫽ 0.059, and this comparison interacted with test trial type,
F(1, 23) ⫽ 9.48, MSE ⫽ 0.49. Again, simple effects analyses
showed that performance was superior for the intermixed condition on the different test trials, F(1, 23) ⫽ 9.83, MSE ⫽ 0.097, but
not on the same test trials (F ⬍ 1). Finally, there was no difference
between the blocked and spaced conditions, and there was no
interaction between these conditions and test trial type (F ⬍ 1, in
both cases).
These findings suggest that discriminability of the stimuli was
enhanced by intermixed preexposure, and this was the case even
when comparison was made with a blocked control condition in
which the stimulus presentations were spaced. On the face of it,
this is evidence against the idea that the intermixed– blocked effect
is the result of distributed practice in the intermixed condition. In
particular, this result implies that the intermixed– blocked effect is
not a consequence of the intermixed schedule, allowing a greater
opportunity for consolidation of the memory trace. If anything,
there appears to be greater scope for consolidation following each

in which DX and X were presented; and (6) spaced same, in which
DX and DX were presented. The order of stimulus presentation
was randomized across test trials. Each unique feature (A–D) was
presented on 12 trials in total, there being 6 different trials and 6
same trials with each.
Test trials consisted of the presentation of one stimulus for 800
ms, followed by a blank screen for 550 ms and the presentation of
the second stimulus for 800 ms. A white square was then presented
in place of the checkerboard, and it remained on the screen until
the response was made.

Scoring
A set of planned contrasts using a multivariate, repeated measures model (O’Brien & Kaiser, 1985) was used to analyze the data
from this and all subsequent experiments. A significance level of
p ⬍ .05 was set for all of the statistical analyses.

Results and Discussion
The proportions of correct responses on same and different test
trials are shown in Figure 2. The scores for AX and BX were
combined to produce a mean score for the intermixed condition;
the scores for CX represent the massed preexposure condition and
those for DX, the spaced preexposure condition. Different test
trials are those in which the target cue was compared to X alone;
same test trials are those in which two examples of the target cue
were shown. Accuracy on trials in which identical stimuli were
presented (same test trials) was higher than that on trials in which
different stimuli were presented, F(1, 23) ⫽ 141.08, MSE ⫽ 0.069.
Comparison of the three preexposure conditions suggests that on
different test trials, accuracy was higher in the intermixed condition (AX/BX) than in the remaining two conditions (CX and DX).

1

0.8

Proportion correct

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

239

0.6

0.4

0.2

0
AX/BX

CX

DX

AX/BX

Different trials

CX

DX

Same trials
Condition

Figure 2. Mean percentage of correct responses on same and different test trials in Experiment 1. Stimuli were
preexposed on an intermixed (AX and BX) or blocked (CX and DX) schedule. Presentations of CX were massed,
and those of DX were spaced. Error bars indicate standard errors of the mean.

BRIEF REPORTS

240

DX presentation than each AX presentation—the BX presentations
that immediately followed AX might be expected to interfere with
consolidation of the AX memory.
Could the result have been due to greater encoding variability of
AX and BX than of DX? Although temporal spacing was equivalent
in the intermixed and spaced conditions, the interval between DX
presentations was empty, but the interval between AX presentations
contained the presentation of BX (and vice versa). Perhaps the presence of BX between AX presentations increased encoding variability
for this cue. We designed Experiment 2 to address this possibility.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Experiment 2
In this experiment, we aimed to provide a control for the
intermixed condition that equated temporal spacing between stimuli and also presented an event in that interval. In this control
condition, CX was intermixed with a quite different cue, DY
(schematically, the full design was AX/BX_CX/DY). If the
intermixed– blocked effect is due to the temporal spacing of trials,
performance in response to AX and CX will be equivalent on test.
Furthermore, the events that occur in the interval between stimulus
presentations are also (as far as possible) equated. It is only the
AX/BX condition that allows comparison of two similar stimuli
and therefore the extraction of their unique features according to
Gibson (1969).

Method
The participants were 32 undergraduate students from the University of New South Wales who volunteered for the experiment in
return for course credit. The apparatus and stimuli were the same
as those used in Experiment 1 with the addition of a further
background stimulus, Y. This background had the same pattern of
gray and colored squares as was present in the stimulus referred to
as X in Experiment 1, allowing the unique features to be located in
the same place (replacing the same area of gray) on both backgrounds. However, the color of each of the brighter colored
squares of the checkerboard was changed from that used previously. Which of these backgrounds served as X and which as Y
was counterbalanced across participants. There were two phases of
preexposure. Compounds AX and BX were intermixed in one
phase, and CX and DY were intermixed in the other phase (order
counterbalanced). Each stimulus was presented 60 times. Across
participants, the unique features presented in the stimuli in Figure 1 played the role of features A–D equally often.
As in Experiment 1, the test phase required same– different
judgments on pairs of stimuli. In the different test trials, the target
stimuli AX, BX, and CX were compared to X alone. On the same
test trials, these stimuli were presented twice. To maintain continuity with the conditions that prevailed during training, we presented all possible remaining stimulus combinations on test as
filler trials. Thus, overall, each unique feature A–D was presented
in compound both with X and with Y. This produced eight types
of different trials in total in the test phase: four in which the stimuli
AX–DX were compared to X and four in which the stimuli
AY–DY were compared to Y. Each of these trial types was
presented four times making a total of 32 different test trials. There
were 10 types of same test trial on which two of each of the
following stimuli were presented: AX–DX, AY–DY, X, and Y.

These trial types were presented once each, making a grand total
of 42 trials. In respects not specified here, the procedure was the
same as that described for Experiment 1.

Results and Discussion
The results of the critical test trials, those on which AX (or BX)
and CX were presented, are shown in Figure 3. Just as in Experiment 1, performance on same test trials was better than it was on
different test trials, F(1, 31) ⫽ 70.21, MSE ⫽ 0.216. More importantly, performance on trials in which AX (or BX) was presented
appears to be better than that on trials in which CX was presented,
whether on same or different trials. A contrast comparing overall
performance across the two types of test confirmed this observation, F(1, 31) ⫽ 8.38, MSE ⫽ 0.106. There was no interaction
between the training conditions (AX/BX and CX/DY) and the test
trial type (same and different; F ⬍ 1).
These results support the conclusion that superior performance
to AX and BX on the same– different test is due neither to better
consolidation of the memory trace during preexposure nor to
greater variability in encoding conditions. There is no obvious
reason to suppose that either of these mechanisms would have an
advantage in the AX/BX preexposure regime relative to the
CX/DY regime. In fact, one might argue that variability of CX is
greater than that of AX or BX, because the DY cue presented in the
interval is very different from all other events experienced during
the encoding phases. We further conclude that alternation of trial
types is not enough in itself to produce enhancement of discrimination; rather, it is critical that the target cue be presented in
alternation with a similar cue. This latter issue has previously been
examined in an experiment by Mackintosh, Kaye, and Bennett
(1991, Experiment 4), who used rats as subjects, a betweensubjects design, and a flavor-conditioning procedure. As in our
experiment, they found that perceptual learning (better discrimination of AX and BX on test) was observed when AX and BX
were intermixed in preexposure but not when AX was intermixed
with BY. Our present results thus constitute a confirmation and
extension of this earlier finding, as we used a within-subjects
design and a very different procedure and species.

General Discussion
It was shown in two experiments that intermixed presentations
of similar checkerboard stimuli, AX and BX, produce very good
performance on a same– different test in which discrimination is
required between AX and X and between BX and X. In Experiment 1, this performance was superior to that shown to the blocked
cues CX and DX, whether those cues were preexposed on a
massed (CX) or spaced (DX) schedule. In Experiment 2, performance to AX and BX was also superior to that shown to CX, when
CX had been intermixed with presentations of the dissimilar stimulus DY in the preexposure phase. The CX/DY control condition
in Experiment 2 controls for every feature of AX/BX preexposure
except for the similarity of the cues that are intermixed. Consolidation
of the memory trace and encoding variability are, therefore, ruled out
as sources of the superior performance to AX and BX on test.
Any theory of the intermixed– blocked effect must, therefore,
account for the fact that the similarity of the intermixed stimuli
(the presence of many common X elements) is critical in produc-

BRIEF REPORTS

241

1

Proportion correct

0.8

0.6

0.4

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

0.2

0
AX/BX

CX

AX/BX

Different trials

CX

Same trials
Condition

Figure 3. Mean percentage of correct responses on same and different test trials in Experiment 2 when stimuli
AX, BX, and CX were compared to the common element X. Presentations of AX and BX were intermixed with
one another in preexposure. Stimulus CX was intermixed with DY in preexposure. Error bars indicate standard
errors of the mean.

ing the effect. Gibson (1969) argued that the opportunity to compare stimuli allows attention to be focused on the unique features
of the stimuli. When AX and BX are intermixed, these unique
features are A and B. Increased attention to A and B will produce
better performance when AX and X are compared in a same–
different test; it is the detection of A that allows a correct response
to be made. However, in the CX/DY schedule, there are many unique
features (C, X, and Y), and so attention will be diffused across all of
these features, including the features (those that make up X and Y)
that are not important in the discrimination of CX and X.
Gibson’s (1969) proposal does not, however, provide a psychological mechanism to explain how the unique features are identified as a consequence of stimulus comparison. In the following
discussion we present two recent theories of the intermixed–
blocked effect, both derived from studies of animal learning,
which might be seen (to a greater or lesser extent) as providing the
mechanism that underlies Gibson’s process of comparison. We
then also propose a new account that is based on theories of
memory, rather than of learning. This new theory is more obviously consistent with Gibson’s original ideas and has the great
virtue of also providing an explanation for massed–spaced effects
when they are observed.
McLaren and Mackintosh (2000) suggested that contemporary
associative learning theory can in fact account for the intermixed–
blocked effect and therefore perceptual learning more generally.
They suggested that intermixed, but not blocked, preexposure to
AX and BX promotes the formation of inhibitory links between the
unique features A and B. This is because A predicts the absence of
the B element on AX trials (and B predicts the absence of A on BX
trials). Specifically, the representation of B is activated on AX
trials due to the presence of X elements—the X elements are
associated with B as a consequence of previous BX trials. How-

ever, the A cue perfectly predicts the absence of this activated B
element and so comes to inhibit B. The ability of the common
feature X to activate B on AX trials is critical to the operation of
this mechanism; A cannot come to inhibit B unless B is expected
to appear on AX trials. In other words, the two stimuli must have
common elements (they must be similar) for the inhibitory link to
form.
An alternative hypothesis, suggested by Hall (2003), is that
intermixed, but not blocked, preexposure protects the unique features from the normal habituation process that would otherwise
take place across preexposure. This protection from habituation
would maintain the salience of the unique features and would,
therefore, render AX and BX more distinct. Hall’s theory, just like
that of McLaren and Mackintosh (2000), relies on activation of B
by X on AX trials (and A on BX trials). However, Hall suggested
that associative activation of this kind does not lead to inhibition
but increases the salience of the unique cues by reversing the
normal habituation process. Again, in the case of the CX/DY
schedule, because C is not activated on DY trials (nor D on CX trials),
this reverse habituation process will not occur, and the salience of C
and D will not increase. In postulating a process of salience modulation, Hall’s theory is closer to Gibson’s (1969) account than is
McLaren and Mackintosh’s (2000). The theories are similar, however,
in that both rely on activation of the B representation on AX trials and
A on BX trials for their mechanisms to operate.
There is an account of the effect of spaced practice on human
memory that we have not yet considered, which may also
provide an explanation for the present results. Jacoby (1978)
suggested that when a stimulus is presented on more than one
occasion, if prior presentations of a stimulus are remembered,
then encoding on later trials will be reduced. If, however, the
earlier stimulus presentations are forgotten, then the later pre-

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

242

BRIEF REPORTS

sentation will require greater processing resources and so will
be better encoded. This accounts for the massed–spaced effect;
when practice is spaced, memory for prior presentations of the
stimulus will be poorer, and so encoding will be better on later
trials. It can also account for the better performance to AX and
BX than to DX that was seen in our Experiment 1. It seems
reasonable to suppose that the empty interval interpolated between successive DX presentations would fail to interfere with
retrieval of prior DX presentations. Interpolated BX presentations might be expected to result in retrieval interference of
prior AX presentations and vice versa. Thus, encoding of AX
and BX in memory (and therefore discrimination between these
cues and X on test) would be better than that of DX.
With added assumptions, Jacoby’s (1978) theory can also account
for the findings of Experiment 2. On AX trials, X elements will be
more easily processed than A elements, because X elements were
presented more recently (on the immediately preceding BX trial).
Presentation of the A element will not have occurred on the preceding
trial, and so A will not be remembered so well. Because the X
elements are easier to process, attentional resources will be directed
toward the encoding of A. The consequence will be that A (and B)
will receive greater processing resources and be better encoded in
memory than the common X elements. These well-encoded representations of A and B can then be used to distinguish between AX and
X (or BX and X on test) on test—perceptual learning. This account
seems to capture the essence of Gibson’s (1969) proposal, in that
attention is directed toward the unique features, and those features are
extracted from the background and encoded. (It is interesting that an
account conceptually similar to that just outlined was put forward by
Honey & Bateson, 1996, on the basis of the habituation processes
envisaged by Wagner’s 1981 learning theory.)
On CX trials in the CX/DY schedule, both C and X elements
will be equivalently easy (or difficult) to process, as neither of
these elements was presented on the immediately preceding DY
trial. As a consequence, processing resources will be distributed
across all elements, and the C feature will not be especially well
encoded. Thus, CX will not be discriminated from X on test. This
analysis also explains the poor performance seen in the blocked
condition of the original intermixed– blocked effect (Honey et al.,
1994; Symonds & Hall, 1995). When all AX trials appear in a
block, both A and X will have been presented on the immediately
preceding trial. As a result, both A and X will be easily processed
and poorly encoded (and the same is true of BX). Discrimination
will, therefore, be poor on test.
In conclusion, our results suggest that the intermixed– blocked
effect in perceptual learning is not merely an example of the wellknown effect of massed versus spaced practice. However, one account of why spaced practice improves memory (Jacoby, 1978) can,
when combined with an elemental approach to stimulus representation, provide an account of the results presented here. It seems then
that perceptual learning provides a context in which the areas of
learning and memory can become more closely linked than they have
been in the past, both at the procedural and at the theoretical level.
Perhaps the analysis presented here will also be useful in the interpretation of contextual interference effects observed in verbal learning
(Battig, 1972) and motor learning (Shea & Morgan, 1979).

References
Battig, W. F. (1972). Intratask interference as a source of facilitation in
transfer and retention. In R. F. Thompson & J. F. Voss (Eds.), Topics in
learning and performance (pp. 131–159). New York: Academic Press.
Dwyer, D. M., Hodder, K. I., & Honey, R. C. (2004). Perceptual learning
in humans: Roles of preexposure schedule, feedback, and discrimination
assay. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology: Comparative and
Physiological Psychology, 57(B), 245–259.
Ebbinghaus, H. (1964). Memory: A contribution to experimental psychology (H. A. Ruger, C. E. Bussenius, & E. R. Hilgard, Trans.). New York:
Dover. (Original work published 1885)
Gibson, E. J. (1969). Principles of perceptual learning and development.
East Norwalk, CT: Appleton–Century–Crofts.
Gibson, E. J., & Walk, R. D. (1956). The effect of prolonged exposure to
visually presented patterns on learning to discriminate them. Journal of
Comparative and Physiological Psychology, 49, 239 –242.
Glenberg, A. M. (1979). Component-levels theory of the effects of spacing of
repetitions on recall and recognition. Memory and Cognition, 7, 95–112.
Hall, G. (2003). Learned changes in the sensitivity of stimulus representations: Associative and nonassociative mechanisms. Quarterly Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Comparative and Physiological Psychology, 56(B), 43–55.
Honey, R. C., & Bateson, P. (1996). Stimulus comparison and perceptual
learning: Further evidence and evaluation from an imprinting procedure.
Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology: Comparative and Physiological Psychology, 49(B), 259 –269.
Honey, R. C., Bateson, P., & Horn, G. (1994). The role of stimulus
comparison in perceptual learning: An investigation with the domestic
chick. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology: Comparative and
Physiological Psychology, 47(B), 83–103.
Jacoby, L. L. (1978). On interpreting the effects of repetition: Solving a
problem versus remembering a solution. Journal of Verbal Learning &
Verbal Behavior, 17, 649 – 667.
Lavis, Y., & Mitchell, C. J. (2006). Effects of preexposure on stimulus
discrimination: An investigation of the mechanisms responsible for
human perceptual learning. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 59, 2083–2101.
Mackintosh, N. J., Kaye, H., & Bennett, C. (1991). Perceptual learning in
flavor aversion conditioning. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology: Comparative and Physiological Psychology, 43(B), 297–322.
McLaren, I. P. L., & Mackintosh, N. J. (2000). An elemental model of
associative learning: I. Latent inhibition and perceptual learning. Animal
Learning & Behavior, 28, 211–246.
O’Brien, R. G., & Kaiser, M. K. (1985). MANOVA method for analyzing
repeated measures designs: An extensive primer. Psychological Bulletin,
97, 316 –333.
Shea, J. B., & Morgan, R. L. (1979). Contextual interference effects on the
acquisition, retention, and transfer of a motor skill. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Learning and Memory, 5, 179 –187.
Symonds, M., & Hall, G. (1995). Perceptual learning in flavor aversion
conditioning: Roles of stimulus comparison and latent inhibition of
common elements. Learning and Motivation, 26, 203–219.
Wagner, A. R. (1981). SOP: A model of automatic memory processing in
animal behavior. In N. E. Spear & R. R. Miller (Eds.), Information
processing in animals: Memory mechanisms (pp. 5– 47). Hillsdale, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Wickelgren, W. A. (1972). Trace resistance and the decay of long term
memory. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 9, 418 – 455.

Received January 25, 2007
Revision received July 18, 2007
Accepted July 24, 2007 䡲

