See discussions, stats, and author proﬁles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/5490058

Aﬀective Incoherence: When Aﬀective Concepts and Embodied Reactions Clash
Article  in  Journal of Personality and Social Psychology · May 2008
DOI: 10.1037/0022-3514.94.4.560 · Source: PubMed

CITATIONS

READS

39

35

4 authors, including:
Gerald Clore
University of Virginia
136 PUBLICATIONS   20,059 CITATIONS   
SEE PROFILE

Some of the authors of this publication are also working on these related projects:

Feelings as Information View project

All content following this page was uploaded by Gerald Clore on 04 October 2016.
The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded ﬁle.

NIH Public Access
Author Manuscript
J Pers Soc Psychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 May 2.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Published in final edited form as:
J Pers Soc Psychol. 2008 April ; 94(4): 560–578.

Affective Incoherence: When Affective Concepts and Embodied
Reactions Clash
David B. Centerbar,
University of Massachusetts Medical School
Gerald L. Clore,
University of Virginia
Simone Schnall, and
University of Plymouth, UK
Erika Garvin
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Abstract
In five studies, we examined the effects on cognitive performance of coherence and incoherence
between conceptual and experiential sources of affective information. The studies crossed the
priming of happy and sad concepts with affective experiences. In different experiments, these
included: approach or avoidance actions, happy or sad feelings, and happy or sad expressive
behaviors. In all studies, coherence between affective concepts and affective experiences led to better
recall of a story than affective incoherence. We suggested that the experience of such experiential
affective cues serves as evidence of the appropriateness of affective concepts that come to mind. The
results suggest that affective coherence has epistemic benefits, and that incoherence is costly, for
cognitive performance.

Keywords
Affective coherence; embodiment; affect; motor behavior; facial expression

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

In science and in everyday life, we often seek evidence for the truth or appropriateness of our
cognitions, concepts, and beliefs. In that regard, it is frequently the case that, “Seeing is
believing.” For Descartes (1641), however, reason alone allowed humans to identify what is
true. He asserted that it should be accepted as a "first principle" that, "I think, therefore I
am…" (p. 19). Descartes held that discerning truth depends on our ability to "clearly and
distinctly conceive" (p. 20). Thomas Jefferson was also a great proponent of reason, but in an
1820 letter to John Adams, Jefferson asserted that ultimately, we must rely on our senses to
discern reality. In his letter (1820/1993) Jefferson wrote:
…"I feel, therefore I exist." I feel bodies which are not myself: there are other
existences then…. On the basis of sensation…we may erect the fabric of all the
certainties we can have or need…. When once we quit the basis of sensation, all is in
the wind…. A single sense may indeed be sometimes deceived, but rarely; and never
all our senses together…. They evidence realities.

Address correspondence to: Dr. David B. Centerbar, Center for Health Policy and Research, University of Massachusetts Medical School,
222 Maple Avenue, Chang Building, Shrewsbury, MA 01545, Phone: 508-856-8496, Electronic mail: david.centerbar@umassmed.edu.
iAll effects sizes reported are the partial eta squared statistic. For brevity, the symbol η2 is used throughout.

Centerbar et al.

Page 2

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Unlike Descartes, Jefferson asserted the priority of experiential knowledge over conceptual
knowledge. He concluded that our feelings are the most compelling evidence for the truth of
our knowledge about the world.
A compatible contemporary view is expressed in the Feelings-as-Evidence hypothesis (Clore
& Gasper, 2000). It posits that belief-consistent feelings are often experienced as confirmatory
evidence, making the beliefs seem particularly valid. In such instances, "feeling is believing."
Such internally generated feelings may be compelling, because they are experienced in a
manner similar to the sensory feelings elicited by external stimuli. Unlike conceptual
knowledge, which is indirect and subject to verification (Kruglanski, 1989), affective and
sensory feelings are experienced directly and are generally not subject to further verification.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

People's cognitions and the experience of their senses are generally consistent, and we expect
them to be so. Thus, the truth value of a concept can be adjudicated by information from the
senses. In contrast, the affective value of a concept, because it concerns the goodness or badness
of things, cannot be validated by looking, listening, or touching. The experiences available to
support affective concepts are either consensual (e.g., with reference to the affective reactions
of others) or self-generated. Self-generated experiences would include one’s own affective
feelings, affective expressions, and affectively relevant actions. Thus, finding ourselves
smiling would validate the appropriateness of a positive concept that became accessible in
some situation, whereas finding ourselves frowning would not. Such confirmation or
disconfirmation of affective thoughts by embodied affective reactions is an important way in
which mind and body interact. In this article, we examine how affective expressions, feelings,
and actions function as such confirmation and disconfirmation of affective mental content.
Strack and Neumann (1996) proposed a theoretical model to account for how both conceptual
and experiential sources of information might be represented, and interact to influence
behavior. They proposed that information from the environment can be represented in two
modalities -- one conceptual, and one experiential. They define “noetic” knowledge as
memory-based, stored associations, and “experiential knowledge” as phenomenological,
physical experience in a given moment. Both noetic and experiential knowledge can be
valenced, and when these sources of knowledge become coactivated, they can be either
concordant or discordant and have consequences for both epistemic and behavioral outcomes.
Although it was not our aim in the current research to explicitly test the predictions of their
model, we nevertheless find their approach to be a useful organizing framework for our
proposal that the coherence between affective concepts and affective experiences can have
epistemic consequences for ongoing behavior.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Affective Coherence
Affective coherence vs. incoherence, in the present article, concerns the extent to which
experienced affective reactions (such as feelings or other bodily experiences, including
approach or avoidance behaviors, and affective expressions) validate coexisting activated
affective concepts. We view activated affective concepts as hypotheses about evaluative
aspects of the world, which can be either confirmed or disconfirmed by subjective experience.
When experience validates an affective concept, we speak of affective coherence, and when
experience invalidates an affective concept, we speak of affective incoherence. We expect
affective coherence, relative to incoherence, to have beneficial effects on cognitive
performance. Such confirmation allows a person to attend to other things. When experience
conflicts with belief, people are motivated to resolve the conflict, which may interfere with
other attention-demanding activities, and decrease cognitive efficiency.
"Response coherence" is a somewhat different concept, which is a central tenet of some
emotion theories, whereby emotions are believed to comprise coordinated sets of experiential,
J Pers Soc Psychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 May 2.

Centerbar et al.

Page 3

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

behavioral, and physiological responses. Whether or not emotions involve strong response
coherence is currently a matter of debate. Evidence for coherence is mixed (see Barrett,
2006 for a review). However, Mauss et al. (2005) have recently reported strong associations
between experiential, expressive, and physiological measures of emotion in episodes of
amusement and sadness. Similarly, Bonanno and Keltner (2004) found response coherence
between facial expressions and appraisals during narratives of emotional events. Such studies
address questions about the nature of emotion, whereas the current studies assess the
consequences for cognitive performance of affective coherence and incoherence.
The purpose of the present research was to examine the role of coherence and incoherence
between affective concepts and experiences in task performance. We propose that when
embodied, enacted, or experienced affective reactions validate current affective concepts,
ongoing processing is likely to proceed smoothly. But affective reactions that invalidate current
affective concepts create an epistemic problem, which may compete with ongoing processing
and degrade performance. To examine this process, we manipulated the experiences of
engaging in approach-avoidance action, of being in a momentary mood, and of making facial
expressions, and whether they validated or invalidated momentarily accessible concepts. We
expected that affective coherence would produce a subjective sense of fluency that would allow
a person to infer that “all is well,” whereas an experience of disfluency would motivate efforts
aimed at inconsistency resolution, which should hamper performance on other cognitive tasks.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Fluency refers to properties of continuous information processing, such as speed or ease of
processing (Reber, Winkielman & Schwarz, 1998; Winkielman & Cacioppo, 2001;
Winkielman, Schwarz, Fazendeiro & Reber, 2003). Generally, fast, effortless, or fluent
processing of information elicits positive affect. For example, EMG measures indicate that
fluency is associated with activation of the zygomaticus muscle used for smiling, but not with
the corrugator muscle used for frowning (Winkielman & Cacioppo, 2001). Feelings of fluency
should occur when multiple sources of affective information (e.g., emotional feelings and
expressions) are “in sync” (Richards & Gross, 2000). The experience of fluency, like the
experience of positive affect, signals the absence of problems, thus allowing full attention to
be devoted to whatever task is at hand.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

The current research on coherence is, however, not limited to positive thoughts, feelings, and
expressions, but is equally relevant to negative affect. For example, feeling sad in response to
another’s sadness is an example of affective coherence in the sense that it validates the feelings
of the sad other (Martin, Abend, Sedikides & Green, 1997). In a related way, feeling sad in
response to a sad play, novel, or film would be coherent with and would validate the intent of
the author, leading to a positive evaluation of the work. Feeling sad in response to terrible lifeevents would be coherent but presumably would not lead to positive evaluations of the event.
Nevertheless, such coherence should be experienced as appropriate, and be conducive to fluent
processing.
As these examples suggest, the confirmation of positive or negative affective concepts by
corresponding experiences is one form of affective coherence. However, we intend affective
coherence to be a broader concept than instances of direct valence matching. Affective
coherence could also be achieved by engaging in action appropriate to activated concepts.
Thus, experiencing the muscular feedback from smiling would be affectively coherent with
entertaining positive concepts, as would engaging in approach behavior. The instances of
affective coherence examined in this article involved the validation of affective meaning
through embodied affective reactions, including actions (Study 1 and Study 2), feelings (Study
3), and expressions (Study 4 and Study 5). We hypothesize that there are epistemic benefits to
affective coherence and epistemic costs to affective incoherence, and that these costs and
benefits should influence processing efficiency as reflected in such cognitive measures as

J Pers Soc Psychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 May 2.

Centerbar et al.

Page 4

reaction time and recall. Relevant evidence for this hypothesis can be found in various
literatures, as discussed in the next section.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Support for the Affective Coherence Hypothesis
Three lines of work suggest the importance of affective coherence: (1) research on emotion
regulation (Richards & Gross, 1999, 2000), (2) research on “affective certainty” (Tamir,
Robinson & Clore, 2002), and (3) research on affectively-relevant motor behavior (Briñol &
Petty, 2003; Cacioppo, Priester & Berntson, 1993; Förster & Strack, 1996, 1997, 1998;
Neumann & Strack, 2000).

Affective Coherence and Emotion Regulation

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

People sometimes try not to show their true feelings, and may adopt facial or other expressions
that do not reflect how they feel. Richards and Gross (1999, 2000) have examined such emotion
suppression. They found that participants attempting to suppress their emotions by actively
inhibiting observable emotional expressions showed impaired memory performance compared
with participants who were free to exhibit emotional expressions. For example, in one
experiment (Richards & Gross, 2000), participants watched a film clip of an interpersonal
confrontation. Half of the participants were asked to suppress any emotional expression and
half watched the film without such instructions. Suppression did not change their emotional
experiences, but did affect their recall and their confidence in their recall.
In another study, Richards and Gross (2000) compared emotion suppression with reappraisal
of the event. The reappraisal condition consisted of looking at slides of injured people from
the perspective of a medical professional. A memory deficit was found for the emotion
suppression group, but not for the reappraisal group. The authors suggest that emotional
suppression, like other forms of self-regulation (Baumeister, Bratslavsky, Muraven & Tice,
1998; Vohs & Heatherton, 2000), is an effortful process drawing on limited resources.
We suggest that such suppression involves affective incoherence. That is, participants in the
suppression condition adopted a non-affective expression that did not match their affective
interpretation of the film. However, the reappraisal condition of the experiment would not have
involved incoherence, since participants’ new, non-affective interpretations would have been
matched by the non-affective expressions they had adopted.

Affective Coherence and Affective Certainty
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Tamir et al. (2002) reported differences in information processing efficiency when current
moods were either consistent or inconsistent with chronic trait affect. They suggested that when
momentary affective feelings correspond to people's beliefs about their usual affect, they serve
as data confirming the person's self-view. Thus, happy feelings confirm beliefs about being a
happy person, whereas unhappy feelings confirm beliefs about being an unhappy person. This
kind of match of belief and experienced feelings results in what Tamir et al. termed affective
certainty. In four experiments, they found that people experiencing affective certainty
processed affective information more efficiently than did people experiencing feelings that
conflicted with their beliefs about their usual feelings. Tamir et al. focused on the match
between affective traits and affective feelings, and documented an epistemic benefit of having
one’s self-expectations confirmed in experience. The agreement between trait and state affect
that resulted in affective certainty is one form of affective coherence. Another form can be seen
in the validation of affective concepts in motivationally relevant motor behavior.

J Pers Soc Psychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 May 2.

Centerbar et al.

Page 5

Affective Coherence and Motor Behavior
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Neumann, Förster and Strack (2003) summarize evidence for what they refer to as conceptualmotor compatibility. This work involves motor behaviors such as nodding one’s head in
agreement, or shaking one’s head in disagreement, and performing movements of approach or
avoidance. For example, head nodding can lead to better recall of positive words, whereas head
shaking leads to better recall of negative words (Förster & Strack, 1996). From our viewpoint,
motor actions have such effects because head nodding is the appropriate response to positive
words and an inappropriate response to negative words, the match or mismatch constituting
affective coherence or incoherence, which has implications for the ability to recall the words
later.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Related research used approach and avoidance behaviors in the form of arm flexion and
extension (Cacciopo et al., 1993). Such approach and avoidance actions have been shown to
influence the retrieval of positive and negative information (Förster & Strack, 1997, 1998),
creative problem solving (Friedman & Förster, 2000), and the speed of categorizing valenced
words (Neumann & Strack, 2000). For example, when engaging in approach behavior,
participants are faster at judging positive stimuli, but when engaging in avoidance behavior,
they are faster at judging negative stimuli (Neumann & Strack, 2000). The importance of
experiential factors in such phenomena is apparent from the fact that similar effects occur when
people experience only the visual illusion that the valenced stimuli are approaching or receding.
It is often assumed that approach and avoidance actions are themselves positive and negative
in affective meaning. However, recent investigations show that the values of approachavoidance action and head nods and shakes depend on the context in which they occur. Thus,
while viewing negative rather than positive stimuli, the effects of approach and avoidance
responses are reversed, such that approach becomes affectively negative, and avoidance
becomes positive (Centerbar & Clore, 2006). The meaning of approach and avoidance can also
change depending on one’s own perceived spatial location relative to that behavior (Markman
& Brendl, 2005). Also, shaking one’s head while hearing someone recount sad events in their
life enhances sympathy for the person rather than rejection (Tamir et al., 2004).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Studying the effects of head movements on persuasion, Briñol and Petty (2003) replicated past
findings that head nodding increased persuasion relative to head shaking when persuasive
arguments were strong (Wells & Petty, 1980). However, the effect of these head movements
was reversed when arguments were weak. They interpret these findings in the context of their
self-validation hypothesis (Petty, Briñol & Tormala, 2002), which proposes that head nodding
and shaking can validate or invalidate one's own thoughts about persuasive messages. Such
movements affect endorsement of the messages by increasing or decreasing feelings of
confidence in one's current thoughts about the messages. Such findings are compatible with
our notion of affective coherence as involving conceptual validation by embodied reactions.

Overview of the Current Research
In each of the current experiments, affective concepts associated with happiness or sadness
were primed and participants engaged in one of three kinds of embodied reactions as they read
a story. The validation or invalidation of primed concepts by the experienced reactions
constituted affective coherence or incoherence. In each case, participants were then
administered a recall task. In Study 1 and Study 2, the embodied reactions were approach (arm
flexion) and avoidance (arm extension). In Study 3, the embodied reactions were affective
feelings induced by listening to happy or sad music. In Study 4 and Study 5, the embodied
reactions involved engaging the muscles involved in smiling or frowning. Affective coherence
then depended on the compatibility of the primed affective concepts and affectively relevant
embodied reactions. In each case, the question of interest concerned whether cognitive
J Pers Soc Psychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 May 2.

Centerbar et al.

Page 6

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

performance, as assessed by recall, would be influenced by affective coherence or incoherence.
We expected the experience of affective coherence to facilitate, and affective incoherence to
disrupt, ongoing cognitive processing, which should be apparent later in recall performance.

Study 1: Affective Coherence Between Concepts And Motor Behavior
The first study investigated affective recall as a function of primed mental content and
motivationally relevant approach-avoidance behaviors. We predicted that the coherence
between such actions and the content of currently accessible thoughts should facilitate
information processing.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

The relevance of such actions to recall was previously demonstrated by Förster and Strack
(1997, 1998), who asked participants to generate the names of liked, disliked or neutral persons
while engaging in either arm flexion (approach action) or arm extension (avoidance action).
Förster and Strack (1997) reasoned that the positive-negative associations to approachavoidance behaviors and affective evaluation would lead to biased memory search. Indeed,
arm flexion was associated with the generation of more positive names and arm contraction
with more negative names. The second set of investigations (Förster & Strack, 1998) identified
an important boundary condition for arm contraction effects -- the presence of an affective,
evaluative context. As previously noted by Cacioppo et al. (1993), Förster and Strack (1998)
found that the effect of arm contraction on memory retrieval occurs only during an evaluative
task such as generating the names of liked, disliked, or neutral persons. When names were
generated first, and subsequently evaluated during arm contraction, no effect was found.
Recent results from studies by Centerbar and Clore (2006) further clarify such approachavoidance motor effects. They extended the original work of Cacioppo and colleagues
(1993) by showing that the effect of approach-avoidance motor action on evaluation of
ideographs depended on subtle pre-existing differences in the affective valence of the
ideographs. In contrast to the original work, both an approach action with positive ideographs
and a withdrawal action with negative ideographs produced more positive attitudes towards
the ideographs. Avoidance did not lead to more negative attitudes, as previous data would have
suggested. Centerbar and Clore explained this result in terms of a motivational compatibility
model. Approach is a motivationally compatible action for positive stimuli, and avoidance is
a motivationally compatible action for negative stimuli. Motivationally compatible actions
produced more favorable attitudes than incompatible ones, with no evidence of a main effect
of arm contraction. Further, no effect of arm contraction was found with neutral ideographs, a
finding that further supports the compatibility interpretation.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Centerbar and Clore (2006) found additionally that motivationally compatible actions affected
not only evaluation of the focal stimuli (ideographs), but under some conditions also influenced
evaluations of the pleasantness of the arm contractions themselves. Thus, the stimulus-action
combination may produce an experience of fluency, or positive affect, which can then affect
evaluation of one’s own momentary experience. This suggests that such motivationally
compatible actions might produce an experience of ease that could facilitate ongoing
processing more generally.
In the present studies, we therefore hypothesized that the effects of approach-avoidance actions
should again depend on the interaction of the action and the valence of primed affective
concepts. We predicted that this interaction should influence the ease of processing and later
recall of events from a story. We subtly primed participants with happy, sad, or neutral words,
using a scrambled sentences task. To the extent that primed concepts elicit tendencies to
approach or avoid, as demonstrated by Solarz (1960) and Chen and Bargh (1999), we predicted
that people's particular actions would be motivationally compatible or incompatible
experiences. The combinations of approach with positive primes or avoidance with negative
J Pers Soc Psychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 May 2.

Centerbar et al.

Page 7

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

primes should be affectively coherent, facilitating processing of affective material during the
memory task. Alternatively, approach action with negative primes or avoidance actions with
positive primes should be affectively incoherent, disrupting efficient processing and recall.
Since neutral primes should have no implications for approach-avoidance action, we expected
no effects in the neutral prime condition.
Method
Participants—Participants were 59 undergraduate students (26 females) from the University
of Virginia Psychology participant pool who participated for course credit. Participants were
tested individually and in small groups (up to four at a time). The data of three participants
were excluded from analyses because they did not follow instructions, leaving 56 participants
(24 female).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Procedure—Participants were informed that they would engage in various tasks, including
isometric exercises involving their non-dominant arm. The cover story (adapted from Friedman
& Förster, 2000) suggested that the arm positions were related to differential brain hemispheric
activation. The experimenter demonstrated the correct arm position for both arm flexion and
arm extension, and explained that for arm flexion, the participant should bend the arm at the
elbow to make a 90-degree angle, place the palm of the hand under the tabletop, and press
lightly against the bottom edge of the table. For arm extension, the participant should extend
the arm straight, place the palm on the tabletop, and apply a small amount of pressure against
the tabletop. A booklet contained instructions for the following tasks.
Priming procedure: The Scrambled Sentences Task (adapted from Costin, 1969), involved
40 strings of four words. Participants were to underline any three words in each string that
could be combined to form a sentence. A practice item illustrated that for each item, there were
two ways to combine three of the four words to complete a sentence. For example, the words:
“the book close read” could be combined to form either “close the book,” or “read the book.”
Participants were asked to work quickly. The arm movements were not performed during the
priming task.
Participants were randomly assigned to one of three priming conditions (happy, sad, and
neutral). In the happy and sad conditions, half of the 40 items were valenced and half were
neutral. Valenced items included such strings as, “kids played smiled happily” and “depressed
seemed they you.” An example of a neutral string is "the book close read."

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Recall task: Subsequently, participants read a story (adapted from Bower, Gilligan &
Monteiro, 1981) about a fictional character, "Paul." In the story, Paul relates ten happy and ten
sad events from his past. On the basis of random assignment, participants engaged in one of
the two previously demonstrated arm positions as they read the story.
Afterward, participants completed two filler tasks -- drawing a picture of the continental United
States and counting backwards by three’s from 200. Next, they answered questions about Paul,
the character in the story. They judged Paul’s happiness and sadness on scales from 1 (not at
all) to 10 (extremely), and answered two liking questions: “How favorable do you feel toward
Paul?” (−5 = extremely unfavorable, 5 = extremely favorable), and “How much do you think
that you would like Paul if you were to get to know him” (−5 = not at all, 5 = very much).
After completing these judgments, participants had five minutes to write down as many of the
events as they could recall from the Paul story.
Reported feelings: After completing the recall task, participants rated their current feelings
using 15 affect-related words. They indicated, on a scale from 1 (not at all) to 9 (extremely),
J Pers Soc Psychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 May 2.

Centerbar et al.

Page 8

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

how much they were currently experiencing the following feelings: calm, sad, relieved, happy,
anxious, cheerful, relaxed, aroused, pleased, distressed, nervous, miserable, delighted,
stimulated, and gloomy. They then rated their overall mood ("How positive or negative overall
do you feel right now?" with 1 labeled "extremely negative and 9 labeled "extremely positive").
They also rated the arm task in terms of pleasantness (1 = very unpleasant, 9 = very pleasant),
and effort (1 = not at all effortful, 9 = very effortful). Participants further indicated how
enjoyable the Scrambled Sentences task was (1 = not at all enjoyable, 9 = extremely enjoyable).
Finally, participants completed personality measures and answered open-ended questions
probing for suspicions about the hypotheses.
Results
Recall—Two raters, unaware of condition, counted the number of happy and sad events
correctly recalled from the story (alphas of .99 each for positive and negative items), with
discrepancies decided by consensus.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

As hypothesized, recall from the story was greater overall when actions were motivationally
congruent rather than incongruent with primed affective concepts. Data were analyzed using
a mixed-model ANOVA for happy and sad recall with prime valence and arm contraction as
between-subjects factors and valence of items recalled as a repeated measure. The analysis
revealed only the predicted Prime × Arm interaction for recall of events from the story, F(2,
50) = 3.50, p < .04, η2 = .12. Planned comparisons, using contrast weights of 1, 0 and −1 for
positive, neutral, and negative primes, and 1 and −1 for flexion and extension, mirrored the
same interaction pattern, F(1, 50) = 5.92, p < .02 (see Figure 1 for means).There was no
difference in recall of events from the story as a function of arm contraction across levels of
the neutral prime condition, t(13) = −1.38, p = .19, ns.
It is notable that there was no differential recall of positive and negative story events across
conditions, Prime × Arm × Valence interaction, F(2, 50) = .92, ns.
Analyzing recall of the positive and negative items separately showed that the Prime × Arm
interaction was significant for recall of positive events by themselves, F(2, 50) = 3.64, p = .
03, η2 = .13, but not for recall of negative events (all F's < 1).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Ratings of Mood—Consistent with the general hypothesis, analyses of mood reports showed
that people reported feeling more anxious with affective incoherence (M = 5.41, SD = 2.48)
than with affective coherence (M = 3.75, SD = 2.40, F(1, 37) = 4.10, p = .051. Likewise, they
felt more gloomy with affective incoherence (M = 3.60, SD = 2.64) than with affective
coherence (M = 2.19, SD = 1.78, F(1, 37) = 4.08, p = .051. There were also several nonhypothesized main effects. People reported feeling more cheerful with the happy primes (M =
5.90, SD = 1.25) than with the sad primes (M = 5.43, SD = 1.89, F(1, 37) = 7.20, p = .01. People
felt more aroused with arm extension (M = 5.95, SD = 1.56) than with flexion (M = 5.35, SD
= 1.89, F(1, 37) = 9.31, p < .01.
Ratings of Arm Contraction Task—There were no effects of the experimental conditions
on either ratings of the pleasantness, all Fs < 1.46, ns., or the effortfulness of the arm task, all
Fs < 1.32, ns.
Discussion
The results showed that affective coherence between actions and affective concepts influenced
cognitive performance, as measured by story recall. Evidence for this conclusion was the
finding that story recall depended on an interaction between two variables -- engaging in

J Pers Soc Psychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 May 2.

Centerbar et al.

Page 9

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

approach vs. withdrawal action while reading a story and having had happy vs. sad concepts
primed. In addition to the importance of affective coherence with which we are primarily
concerned, two other aspects of these results are notable. First, the cognitive impact of engaging
in arm flexion and extension depended on what was in mind at the time. In no instances did
the main effects of prime alone, or action alone, approach significance. These results are
consistent with previously reported research (Centerbar & Clore, 2006) examining the effects
of approach and avoidance actions on evaluation.
Second, the primary impact of coherence was on the total level of recall, regardless of the
valence of the particular events that were remembered. Compatibility between approachavoidance action and the valence of primed affective concepts resulted in better recall of the
entire set of story events. There was no tendency for positive affect to cue recall of positive
events, as might be predicted by a mood-congruent memory hypothesis (e.g., Bower, 1981).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

The recall results were consistent with the hypothesized effect of affective coherence on the
processing of affective information. In addition, if affective coherence produces its effects via
fluency, one might expect the experience to influence affective reactions as well (Winkielman
& Cacioppo, 2001). In fact, participants did report feeling more negative affect (anxious and
gloomy) in the affectively incoherent conditions. However, these effects were not generally
strong. One possible explanation is that, because the focus in Study 1 was on processing and
recall, the mood measures were not administered until after the recall task had been completed.
Hence, any momentary effects on mood may have dissipated by that point. In Study 2 the
procedure was varied to determine how robust the obtained effects were and whether varying
the point at which affect was measured would provide evidence of the hypothesis that affective
coherence-incoherence influences the experience of fluency.

Study 2: Affective Consequences of Affective Coherence
In Study 2, some participants reported their mood immediately after the experimental
manipulation (and before the recall task), while others reported their mood as in Study 1. We
predicted that affective coherence involving motivational compatibility of approach-avoidance
action with primed affective concepts would produce more pronounced differences in mood
when measured immediately than after a delay.
Method

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Participants—Participants were 77 undergraduate students (62 females) from the University
of Virginia Department of Psychology participant pool who participated to fulfill a course
requirement. Participants were tested individually and in small groups (up to four at a time).
Two of the participants were excluded from the analyses for failing to follow instructions, thus
leaving 75 participants (61 female).
Procedure—The procedure for Experiment 2 was identical to the one in Experiment 1 except
for two changes in the sequence of tasks. First, participants completed the same scrambled
sentences priming procedure described in Study 1, while simultaneously engaging in either
arm flexion or arm extension. That is, the arm contraction task was paired with the priming
task in Study 2, rather than with reading the Paul story. Second, half of the participants
completed the ratings of their current mood and of the pleasantness of the arm task and
scrambled sentences task immediately after this manipulation (“immediate condition”). The
other half completed a filler task at this point in the experiment (“delayed condition”). All
participants then read the Paul story. Following a filler task (drawing a map), all participants
made evaluations about the character Paul, after which they were given five minutes for the
recall task. Participants in the “delayed condition” then rated their mood, the arm task and

J Pers Soc Psychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 May 2.

Centerbar et al.

Page 10

scrambled sentences task. During this time, participants in the “immediate condition” worked
on the filler task that had been completed earlier by those in the delayed condition.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Finally, participants completed the same surveys as in Experiment 1 about individual
differences in affective functioning, demographic information, and suspicion regarding the
purpose of the study.
Results
Scoring of Recall Data—Three independent raters blind to condition scored participants'
recall of happy and sad events (alpha = .98 for the happy items and .97 for the sad items), as
in Study 1.
Recall—The order of when participants reported their moods before or after the Paul story
was not expected to influence recall, and it did not, (all F's involving order < 2.35, n.s.). As a
result, this order variable was excluded from further recall analyses.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Of primary interest was the influence of affective coherence on total recall. Consistent with
Study 1, the analysis indicated that people recalled more items from the story overall when
there was coherence between affective cues. The ANOVA revealed a marginally significant
Prime × Arm interaction for recall of events from the story, F(2, 69) = 2.81, p = .07, η2 = .08.
Planned comparisons, using contrast weights of 1, 0 and −1 for positive, neutral, and negative
primes, and 1 and −1 for flexion and extension showed a significant interaction, F(1, 69) =
6.94, p < = .01 (see Figure 2). Also as expected, there was no difference in recall of events
from the story as a function of arm contraction in the neutral prime condition, t(24) = .98, p
= .34, ns.
Several additional effects were also obtained. There was a reliable difference in the number of
positive and negative events recalled from the story. Overall, significantly more negative events
(M = 3.36) than positive events (M = 2.96) were recalled, t(74) = 1.99, p = .05. There was also
a trend for a within-subjects Prime × Valence of Items recalled interaction, F(2,69) = 2.64, p
= .08. Further inspection of this interaction showed some evidence for prime-congruent recall.
Specifically, positive items were recalled at a higher rate by people experiencing positive
primes (M = 3.20, SD = 1.35) compared to people experiencing negative primes (M = 2.67,
SD = 1.46), with recall in the neutral prime condition in the middle (M = 2.92, SD = 1.76).
Negative items were recalled at a higher rate by people experiencing negative primes (M =
3.63, SD = 1.32) compared to people experiencing positive primes (M = 3.08, SD = 1.32), with
recall in the neutral prime condition in between the two (M = 3.42, SD = 1.70). Nevertheless,
these effects did not approach significance, and do not qualify the effect on overall recall.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

As in Study 1, the effect of affective coherence on total recall was not moderated by differences
in the recall of positive or negative events from the story, as revealed by the non-significant
Prime × Arm × Valence of Event interaction, F < 1. However, unlike Study 1, affective
incoherence produced similar deficits in recall for both positive and negative story items.
Mood Ratings
Immediate versus delayed mood reports: Analyses showed that, as anticipated, affective
coherence between primed concepts and motor action produced positive mood compared to
affective incoherence. Also as anticipated, this pattern appeared only when the measure of
mood was administered close in time to the experience. When mood was assessed later,
participants tended to report their feelings by contrasting them with their (presumed) earlier
feelings at the time of the affective coherent or incoherent experience. Thus, the condition that
had elicited the most elevated mood initially (positive primes, approach) became the least

J Pers Soc Psychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 May 2.

Centerbar et al.

Page 11

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

positive when reported later, and the condition that elicited the least positive mood initially
(negative primes, approach) became more positive when assessed later. These effects emerged
from a significant 3-way interaction between Prime, Arm, and Time on the single-item overall
mood measure ("How do you feel right now," 1 = very negative, 9 = very positive), F(2, 63)
= 4.94, p = .01, η2 = .14 (see Table 3). Mood ratings were also analyzed separately for the
Immediate and Delayed groups.
Immediate mood reports: As predicted, participants reported more positive moods after
experiencing the affectively coherent pairings of Prime and Arm, as evidenced by a significant
2-way interaction, F(2, 32) = 4.79, p = .02, η2 = .23 on the single overall mood item ("How
positive or negative do you feel right now?"). The test of the planned contrasts using contrast
weights of 1, 0 and −1 for positive, neutral, and negative primes, and 1 and −1 for flexion and
extension was highly reliable, F(1, 32) = 8.50, p < .01. This interaction indicated that affective
coherence (approach-positive, avoid-negative) was experienced more positively and affective
incoherence (approach-negative, avoid-positive) was experienced more negatively than the
same actions with affectively neutral primes.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

In addition to the effects on the single-item mood measure, participants also reported feeling
significantly more cheerful (F(2, 32) = 4.18, p = .03, η2 = .21), relaxed (F(2, 32) = 3.76, p = .
03, η2 = .20), pleased (F(2, 32) = 4.84, p = .02, η2 = .24), and delighted (F(2, 32) = 4.84, p = .
02, η2 = .24) after experiencing affective coherence, and significantly less gloomy (F(2, 32) =
3.59, p = .04, η2 = .19) and distressed (F(2, 32) = 5.30, p = .01, η2 = .26), (see Table 2 for
means and SDs).
Two non-hypothesized main effects were revealed. As in Study 1, participants reported feeling
significantly more aroused with arm extension (M = 3.44, SD = 1.86) than with arm flexion
(M = 1.53, SD = .84), t(35) = 4.27, p < .01. They likewise reported feeling more aroused with
negative primes (M = 3.00, SD = 1.84) than with positive primes (M = 1.67, SD = .98), t(24)
= 2.25, p = .03, with arousal in the neutral prime condition in between the two (M = 2.64,
SD = 1.80).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Delayed mood reports: As anticipated, the affective consequences of coherence and
incoherence were no longer apparent by the end of the experiment when the delayed mood
assessment was made. Analysis of the single item mood measure revealed only a significant
main effect of prime, F(2, 31) = 5.92, p < .01, η2 = .28, which reflected the tendency for later
reports to be expressed in relation to earlier feelings at the time of the prime-action coherence
or incoherence. Specifically, post-hoc analyses indicated that mood was more positive in the
neutral prime condition (M = 6.67, SD = .98) than in the positive prime condition (M = 4.83,
SD = 1.99), t(25) = 3.14, p < .01. Similarly, people reported feeling more miserable after delay
in the affective coherence conditions compared to the incoherent conditions, F(1, 18) = 10.21,
p < .01, η2 = .31. Several non-hypothesized main effects also emerged. Participants reported
feeling more pleased with the negative primes than with the positive primes, t(20) = 3.49, p
< .01. With regard to mood and arm contraction, people reported feeling more happy, cheerful,
pleased and delighted after arm extension (avoidance) then arm flexion (approach), all p's < .
01. Again, these results appear to reflect a tendency for participants to use their (presumed)
earlier feelings as a standard against which to express their later feelings.
Ratings of arm contraction task: Ratings of the pleasantness of the arm contraction task
showed no significant effects. Primes did influence ratings of the effortfulness, F(2, 69) = 3.63,
p = .03, with arm contraction rated as more effortful in the sad prime condition (M = 4.58) than
in the happy prime condition (M = 3.24), t(47) = 2.16, p = .03 or in the neutral prime condition
(M = 3.05), t(48) = 2.45, p = .02. These effects have no obvious bearing on the predicted effects,

J Pers Soc Psychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 May 2.

Centerbar et al.

Page 12

since effortfulness did not differ as a function of arm position, or its interaction with primes,
Fs < .26, ns.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Discussion
In Study 2, participants engaged in either an approach behavior or avoidance behavior during
a priming task designed to activate happy, neutral, or sad concepts. We found that the affective
coherence of engaging in an action motivationally appropriate to the valence of the primed
concept led to better overall recall of story items, replicating the findings of Study 1. We also
tested the hypothesis that affective coherence should be associated with an experience of
fluency, and thus should produce reliable differences in positive affect. Indeed, participants
reported feeling more positively after the experience of affective coherence when mood was
measured immediately.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

There was some tendency for mood reports after a delay to contrast with earlier mood at the
time of the coherence or incoherence experience. Such contrast effects are not uncommon when
aspects of the procedure encourage participants to use an earlier affective moment as a standard
of comparison (e.g., Strack, Schwarz, & Gschneidiger, 1985). The current study replicated the
affective coherence effect for recall, and demonstrated that this experience is also associated
with the presence of positive affect, as in previous investigations of fluency (e.g., Winkielman
& Cacioppo, 2001). We interpret the effects as due to affective coherence following the
motivational compatibility of the action and the primed concepts. Such coherence led to greater
ability to process and later recall the story events.
An alternative hypothesis is that the effects were due to the positive mood produced by
affectively compatible action. Motivationally compatible action should, and did, lead to
positive affect. Hence, the positive mood caused by coherence may have facilitated recall. If
so, affective coherence per se may not lead to greater cognitive efficiency. Thus, a question
raised by the results of Study 1 and Study 2 is whether the effective variable was mood or
affective coherence. In Study 3 we manipulated mood directly. As in the first two studies, we
primed positive or negative concepts and crossed them with this mood manipulation. If the
effects were due to positive affect then direct manipulation of positive affect through a mood
induction should result in greater recall. On the other hand, if the effects were due to affective
coherence then the effect of mood on recall should depend instead on its coherence with the
primed concepts.

Study 3: Affective Coherence Between Affective Concepts and Mood
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

In Study 3 we used the same priming procedure as in Study 1 and Study 2, and induced feelings
of happiness or sadness using music. We expected that induced affective feelings would
provide experiential evidence for the appropriateness of similarly valanced primed concepts,
producing a state of affective coherence. We again expected such affective coherence to
facilitate cognitive processing, as indicated in better recall. In contrast, affective feelings
occurring in association with opposite valenced primed thoughts should constitute an
experience of affective incoherence that should be disruptive to ongoing processes, as indicated
by poorer recall.
Method
Participants—Participants were 60 undergraduate students from the University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign who either participated to fulfill a course requirement, or were paid $5 for
their participation. The data of two participants were excluded from analyses because they did
not follow instructions, thus leaving 58 participants (43 female).

J Pers Soc Psychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 May 2.

Centerbar et al.

Page 13

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Procedure—Upon arrival in the laboratory, participants were informed that the first activity
concerned music appreciation, and would consist of listening to music for about 10–15 minutes.
The experimenter told participants that, “Because previous research suggests that ratings of
music are more reliable after a short delay between hearing the music and judging it, we will
ask you to rate the music some time after you have listened to it. During this time, we will ask
you to do some activities for another research project.”
Affect induction: Participants then listened through headphones to happy or sad music for
12.5 minutes (adapted from Niedenthal, Halberstadt, & Setterlund, 1997). Music intended to
induce happiness consisted of allegros from Eine Kleine Nachtmusik, Divertimento in D, and
Serenade in D, all by Mozart, whereas music intended to induce sadness consisted of parts of
Adagio for Strings by Barber and Adagietto by Mahler. While the music was playing, the lights
were dimmed, and the doors to the rooms were closed, to minimize distractions and help
participants focus on the music. After 12.5 minutes, the music was turned off, and the lights
were turned on. Throughout the mood induction procedure no mention was made of the happy
or sad feelings that the music was intended to elicit.
Priming procedure: After the music ended, participants completed the happy and sad versions
of the Scrambled Sentences Task described in Study 1 and Study 2. A neutral prime condition
was included in this study.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Recall task: Next, participants read the same Paul story as in Study 1 and Study 2, completed
a filler task consisting of drawing a map of the continental United States, and then answered
questions about the story character Paul. They answered two questions about Paul’s typical
affect (“How sad of a person would you say Paul is?” and “How happy a person would you
say Paul is?”) on a scale from 0 (not at all) to 10 (extremely), as well as a question about how
much they liked him. After these judgments, participants completed the free recall task about
Paul.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Reported feelings: Participants next rated their momentary feelings on a scale of 1 (verys
lightly or not at all) to 5 (extremely), using a list of 18 words similar to those used in Study 1
and Study 2. The specific words were taken from the circumplex model of emotion of Larsen
and Diener (1992; adapted from Russell, 1980, and Watson & Tellegen, 1985). Six of the words
described pleasant feelings (happy, delighted, pleased, glad, cheerful, warmhearted), six
described unpleasant feelings (sad, unhappy, miserable, grouchy, gloomy, blue), three referred
to high arousal states (aroused, stimulated, active) and three referred to low arousal states (quiet,
tranquil, still). Participants also answered questions about feelings during the music, namely,
“How happy were you feeling while listening to the music?” and “How sad were you feeling
while listening to the music?”
Results
Scoring of Recall Data—Two independent raters scored the recall data as in Study 1 and
Study 2, and the average of the two item counts was used in all analyses.
Recall—We predicted that people would recall more events from the story in the affectively
coherent conditions, when the valence of the affective information provided by the primes was
validated by the affective feelings elicited by the music. To test this prediction, participants'
recall of the positive and negative story events was analyzed using a mixed-model ANOVA,
with prime and music as the between-subjects factors and valence of event recalled as the
repeated measure.

J Pers Soc Psychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 May 2.

Centerbar et al.

Page 14

The analysis yielded a marginally significant hypothesized between-subjects Prime × Music
interaction, F(1, 54) = 3.48, p = .07, η2 = .06 for recall of all events (see Figure 3 for means).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

The effect was somewhat smaller than that found in Study 1 (η2 = .15) and Study 2 (η2 = .10).
Consistent with the affective coherence hypothesis, people remembered an additional 1.36
items on average when the valence of the music was consistent with the primed concepts than
when it was not. This effect was not moderated by the valence of the events recalled, as
indicated by the non-significant Prime × Music × Valence of Event interaction, F(1, 54) < 1,
ns.
As in Study 2, a non-hypothesized interaction emerged, between the valence of the prime and
the valence of the event, F(1,54) = 4.57, p < .04. In this priming effect, happy primes led to
recall of more happy events, and sad primes led to recall of more sad events. No such effect
was found for mood.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Manipulation Check—At the end of the experiment, participants rated how happy and how
sad they had felt while listening to the music. Participants who listened to happy music reported
having felt happier (M = 6.66, SD = 2.16) than did those who listened to sad music (M = 4.45,
SD = 2.31), F(1, 54) = 14.92, p < .001, η2 = .21. Also, participants who listened to sad music
reported having felt sadder (M = 4.10, SD = 2.64) than did those who listened to happy music
(M = 1.97, SD = 2.08), F(1, 54) = 11.54, p = .001, η2 = .18. No prime or prime by music effect
was observed.
Ratings of mood taken at the end of the experiment indicated that many participants were no
longer in the mood induced by the music. No effects of music or of the interaction of music
and prime were observed.
Discussion
Consistent with predictions, the results tended to show that affective coherence led to better
story recall than affective incoherence. That is, there was a tendency for people to show superior
recall of the story after experiencing happy primes in happy moods or sad primes in sad moods,
compared to the mismatched conditions. However, these effects were somewhat smaller when
mood was used as the experiential information instead of the experience of approachavoidance.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Neither positive mood nor primed positive concepts by themselves influenced overall recall.
We conclude that affective coherence, rather than mood led to greater cognitive efficiency.
Indeed, affective coherence enhanced recall without producing positive mood. However, the
effects were not as strong as in the previous studies. Study 4 was therefore designed as a
conceptual replication using another kind of bodily cue, namely, happy and sad facial
expressions. In addition, to determine whether awareness of the primed concepts was necessary
to produce these effects, priming words were presented subliminally rather than within a
scrambled sentences task.

Study 4: Affective Coherence Between Affective Concepts and Expressive
Behaviors
Expressive behaviors, such as facial expressions and postures typical of emotional states, have
been found to influence people’s emotional feelings (e.g., Ducles et al., 1989; Flack et al.,
1999; Schnall & Laird, 2003; Soussignan, 2002; Stepper & Strack, 1993; Strack, Martin &
Stepper, 1988) as well as their cognitive processing (e.g., Bodenhausen et al., 1994; Laird,
Cuniff, Sheehan, Shulman & Strum, 1989; Laird, Wagener, Halal & Szegda, 1982; Strack &
Neumann, 2000). Such expressions are relevant to the concept of embodiment, which has
J Pers Soc Psychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 May 2.

Centerbar et al.

Page 15

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

recently become prominent in cognitive science. Proponents of embodied cognition assume
that cognitive processes are influenced and constrained by enactment and bodily involvement
(e.g., Barsalou, 1999; Clark, 1997; Glenberg, 1997; Lakoff & Johnson, 1999; Varela,
Thompson & Rosch, 1991). The same assumptions that underlie the idea of embodied cognition
are applicable to embodied affect (Niedenthal, Barsalou, Winkielman, Krauth-Gruber & Ric,
2005). For example -- central to the embodied cognition position is the assumption that
cognition ultimately serves action. A similar assumption can be made about affect, because
affect provides embodied information about the goodness and badness of objects and situations,
and about the value of enacting or avoiding particular actions (e.g., Clore & Storbeck, 2006).
In Study 4, we hypothesized that the coherence of expressive behaviors that were consistent
with current thoughts should exert the same kind of facilitating influence on cognitive
performance as found in Study 1–Study 3. In Study 4, participants were asked to adopt a happy
or a sad expressive behavior. Further, we explored to what extent awareness of the conceptual
information was a necessary ingredient to our findings. Thus, instead of the Scrambled
Sentences Task used earlier, we used a subliminal priming task (Bargh, Bond, Lombardi &
Tota, 1986; Bargh & Pietromonaco, 1982) to make accessible positive or negative affective
content in a maximally subtle fashion.
Method

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Participants—Participants were 133 undergraduate students (66 females) from the
University of Virginia who either participated to fulfill a course requirement or were paid $6
for participation. The data of one male participant was excluded for failure to follow
instructions. Participants were tested individually and in small groups (up to six at a time).
Procedure—Participants, seated in individual booths, were informed that they would engage
is several tasks, some involving muscle contractions. The experimenter taught the participants
to contract certain facial muscles shown on an anatomical chart, while monitoring that the
correct muscle contractions were produced. These instructions were based on procedures used
in previous studies (e.g., Duclos et al., 1989; Flack et al., 1999; Schnall & Laird, 2003), and
instructions continued until the participant successfully produced the desired expression. The
experimenter was careful never to produce the contractions him/herself, nor to label them as
emotional expressions.
For the “Happiness” Expression, participants contracted the zygomaticus and risorius muscles
by pushing the corners of the mouth up and back while opening the mouth a little. Ostensibly
to activate the trapezius and latissimus dorsi muscles in the back, participants sat up straight
in the chair, with the non-dominant hand on the armrest, legs with knees bent, and feet right
below the knees.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

For the “Sadness” Expression, participants contracted the triangularis muscle by drawing the
corners of the mouth down and back while contracting the platysma by letting the head hang
down. Ostensibly to activate the trapezius and latissimus dorsi muscles in the back, participants
drooped the shoulders and let the body go limp while dropping the rip cage.
After this training phase, the next task was explained to participants, and it was emphasized
that no muscle contractions should be performed during this task.
Priming procedure: Participants were presented with a “vigilance task” that required them to
respond to information on a computer screen. This subliminal priming task was modeled
closely after the procedure described by Bargh and Pietromonaco (1982), and Bargh, Bond,
Lombardi and Tota (1986). Instructions directed participants to focus their gaze on a fixation
point in the middle of the screen. They were told that after a very brief flash, they should
indicate on which side of the screen the flash had appeared, by pressing the “f” key with the
J Pers Soc Psychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 May 2.

Centerbar et al.

Page 16

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

left hand if it had appeared on the left, and the “j” key with the right hand if it had appeared
on the right. The fixation point was 56 cm away from the participant, and stimuli were presented
no closer than 2.7 degrees, and no farther than 6 degrees from the fixation point, ensuring that
they were within the parafoveal visual field. Stimuli were presented for 60 ms and immediately
covered with a mask (XQFBZRMQWX) that was also presented for 60 ms. The stimuli
consisted of 12 words used in the Scrambled Sentences Task from Study 1, and were matched
for word length across the two priming conditions: fun, joke, glad, smile, happy, giggle, elated,
joyful, success, laughter, cheerful, delighted for the happy priming condition, and sad, blue,
glum, mourn, alone, grieve, lonely, gloomy, crushed, dejected, rejected, depressed for the sad
priming condition. Each word was presented four times, once in each corner of the screen,
resulting in 48 trials. To discourage anticipating the stimulus presentations, we followed Bargh
et al. (1986) by incorporating a randomized delay of between 2s and 7s before each flash
occurred.
Affect induction: Next, participants were asked to work on a cognitive task while
simultaneously performing the muscle contractions (corresponding to a “happy”, or “sad”
facial expression and posture) practiced earlier. It was emphasized that if the contractions felt
uncomfortable at any point, they should be released a little, and should never feel painful in
any way.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Recall task: While performing the muscle contractions, participants read the "Paul" story.
Then participants discontinued the contractions, and proceeded to a filler task, involving
perceptual judgments about abstract stimuli for about five minutes. Next, participants answered
questions about how happy or how sad they thought Paul was. They then performed the same
recall task as in the earlier experiments.
Reported feelings: After the recall task, participants rated how they had been feeling
throughout the experiment. The scales were the same as in previous research investigating
affective influences of bodily feedback, and consisted of visual analogue scales for the items
relaxed, angry, happy, sad, afraid, depressed, upset and confused. Each item had a 4-¼ inch
long line next to it, labeled “don’t feel at all” and “feel very strongly” at either end. Participants
were asked to describe their feelings by marking an “X” on the part of the line that best described
how strongly each emotion had been felt.
Affective personality measures: Participants then completed affective personality measures,
demographic questions, and an exit question assessing how difficult it had been to follow
experimental instructions, on a scale from 1 (very easy) to 5 (very difficult).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Priming recognition task: Following Bargh et al. (1986), we checked for any awareness of
the subliminally presented stimuli. Participants were informed that they had been shown words
during the vigilance task, which would be shown again to see if they recognized them. Ten
trials were presented as in the priming task, except that a trial number appeared at the center
of the screen immediately before each presentation. Participants were asked to try to identify
the word presented in each trial from a multiple choice response sheet. The response sheet
listed three words, one of which had been presented on that trial. While randomly ordered
across items, the choices always consisted of the word actually presented, and two decoys. For
example, if glad had been presented), one decoy was a non-presented word of the same length
and affective valence, (e.g., joke), and the other was an affectively neutral word of identical
length (e.g., long). Participants were instructed to guess if they were unsure which word they
had seen.

J Pers Soc Psychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 May 2.

Centerbar et al.

Page 17

Results

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Scoring of Recall Data—Three independent raters scored the recall data as in the previous
studies, and their average was used in all analyses.
Recall—The main finding in Study 1–Study 3 was that when there was agreement between
experiential and conceptual affect cues, participants showed better recall performance than
when there was disagreement. We again tested for this effect using a mixed-model ANOVA,
with happy and sad expression and prime as between-subjects factors, and valence of recalled
event as a repeated factor. As expected, there was a significant Expression X Prime interaction,
F(1, 128) = 3.97, p < .05, η2 = .03, such that participants producing a happy expression after
priming with happy words, and participants producing a sad expression after priming with sad
words showed better recall than those with mismatched expressions and primes (see Figure 4
for means). No other effects were significant, although there was a trend for a main effect of
prime, F(1, 128) = 2.98, p < .09, and all other Fs < 1.60.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Reported Feelings—We had expected that affective coherence between expressive cues
and subliminally activated cognitions would influence memory performance as it did. No
predictions were made about whether such expressive cues would also elicit affective feelings
of mood or emotion. Nevertheless, to determine whether they did, all emotion ratings were
analyzed using separate one-way ANOVAs with expression and prime as between-subject
factors. There was a main effect of expression condition on feeling depressed, F(1, 129)= 4.43,
p <.04, η2 = .03, with more depression reported after producing a sad expression (M = 1.42,
SD = 1.75) compared to producing a happy expression (M = 0.88, SD = 1.12). Further, there
was a main effect of expression condition on feeling angry, F(1, 129)= 4.79, p < .03, η2 = .04,
with more anger after producing a sad expression (M = 1.40, SD = 1.62) compared to producing
a happy expression (M = 0.89, SD = 1.31). However, people did not report feeling more sad,
p < .29, or happy, p < .64 as a function of the expression produced. Thus, the significant effects
on self-reported emotional feelings were not specific to the sad or happy expressions, but rather
produced differences in reports of other negative affect (e.g., depression, anger). When the
negative items were combined, there was a marginally significant effect for expression
condition, F(1, 129) = 3.24, p < .07, η2 = .03, with somewhat higher means for the sadness
(M = 1.56, SD = 1.23) than the happiness expression condition (M = 1.21, SD = 1.01).
Difficulty of Expressive Behaviors—Participants reported the sadness expression to have
been more difficult to produce (M = 2.62, SD = 1.10) than the happiness expression (M = 2.09,
SD = 1.03), F(1, 129) = 7.71, p < .01, η2 = .06.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Recognition Task—As noted earlier, a post-experimental recognition task manipulation test
modeled after Bargh et al. (1986) was used to determine whether participants had been aware
of the subliminally presented happy or sad words. Participants circled more correct emotion
words (M = 4.13, SD = 1.97) than incorrect emotion words (M = 2.54, SD = 1.48), and also
more correct emotion words than neutral words (M = 3.24, SD = 1.77ii). Indeed, a chi-square
analysis comparing the observed frequencies of the three kinds of responses on the recognition
task was significant, X2(2) = 47.50, p < .001, indicating that at least in the recognition task, the
participants had some awareness of the subliminally presented stimuli. However, when
grouping the observations by the four experimental conditions, a chi-square analysis was not
significant, X2(6)= 2.69, p < .61. In other words, participants in all conditions selected the
words presented in the priming task above chance. Further, correct recognition of emotion
words was not correlated with recall of positive (r = −.01) or negative (r = .03) items.
iiBecause some participants had one or more missing observations on the recognition survey, the three types of responses do not sum
exactly to the number of total trials, 10.
J Pers Soc Psychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 May 2.

Centerbar et al.

Page 18

Discussion

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

The findings from Study 4 using implicit priming replicated the main finding of Study 1–Study
3 using explicit priming. Recall was better when the experiential affective cue was affectively
coherent with the primed concepts than when it was not. As in previous research on recall and
affective expression (Laird et al., 1989;Laird et al., 1982;Schnall & Laird, 2003), we found
that sad expressions resulted in more negative affect, but we did not find any direct effect of
expressive behavior on recall. Happy expressions did not result in more positive recall, nor sad
expression in more negative recall. Unlike the earlier work, we included a context of primed
concepts for the expressive behavior. Tamir, Robinson, Clore, Martin & Whitaker (2004) have
shown that such contextual factors can drastically alter the meaning of expressions.
An additional noteworthy finding was that although we closely followed the procedure for
subliminal priming developed by Bargh and colleagues, participants appeared to have had some
awareness of the subliminally primed words. Thus, we cannot rule out the possibility that some
awareness of the primed concepts or their affective tone may be necessary to produce the
coherence effect.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

In the final study we aimed at replicating the findings with expressive behaviors, using the
Scrambled Sentences priming task from Study 1–Study 3 rather than subliminally presented
primes. We also used a different experimental recall task to examine potential underlying
processes involved in the coherence effects documented in Study 1–Study 4. The primary
purpose in this study was to explore the nature of differences in processing associated with
affective coherence and affective incoherence.

Study 5: Affective Coherence and the Construction of Narrative Meaning
In four experiments we exposed participants to affective concepts and affective experiential
cues: approach and avoidance behaviors (Study 1 and Study 2), moods (Study 3), and
expressive behaviors (Study 4), and assessed subsequent recall of affective information. In
each experiment we observed that recall was superior when there was coherence between
affectively relevant sources compared to incoherence between sources. The evidence when
taken together suggests to us that participants experienced differences in fluency in these
affective contexts Although we did not investigate mediating processes directly, we surmise
that fluency differences would have influenced the ease or difficulty of subsequent processing.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

As noted earlier, fluency describes the ease of processing continuous information (Winkielman
et al., 2003). In the four studies that we reported thus far, such a metacognitive feeling of
fluency might be created when several sources of affective information are coherent, where
affective concepts and affective experiences are “in sync.” The results of Study 1 and Study
2, for which we included a neutral priming condition, indicated that coherence was facilitative,
whereas incoherence was inhibitory, in their effects on processing. To the extent that the
fluency associated with affective coherence is the driving force, we would expect that
additional aspects of information processing might also be facilitated. For example, coherence
should not only enhance recall, but also the ease with which recalled information is generated.
Alternatively, the presumed disfluency associated with the experience of incoherence would
likely be experienced as problematic and thus disruptive to ongoing processing. To the extent
that the incoherence suggests an ambiguous affective situation, people may experience more
uncertainty in how to respond to or make sense of the situation. The affective meaning of the
situation may be unclear.
To explore the nature of qualitative differences associated with affective coherence and
incoherence, we chose to examine differences in measures of linguistic style by having people

J Pers Soc Psychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 May 2.

Centerbar et al.

Page 19

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

construct self narratives. Extensive research has demonstrated that as people actively work to
understand unpleasant life experiences, their narrative descriptions of those experiences
change. Making sense of such experiences influences markers of emotional well-being. For
example, Pennebaker observed that the individuals who experienced health benefits from
writing about traumatic events were those who "began with poorly organized descriptions and
progressed to coherent stories by the last day of writing." (Pennebaker, 1997, p. 165). People
experiencing the ease and fluency associated with affective coherence should be more likely
to demonstrate corresponding coherence in their self-generated narratives. In contrast,
disfluency associated with affective incoherence should be more likely to manifest itself in less
coherent self-narratives.
To explore these possibilities, we again exposed participants to affective concepts as they
engaged in expressive behaviors. But this time, we measured indicators of the ease and quality
of information generated. An autobiographical recall task was used to provide the participant
with flexibility about the kind of information to be generated. Participants were exposed to
neutral cue words (e.g., tree) and were asked to think of an experience from their own life
associated with this word, and to write a brief narrative about the nature of that experience.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

One of our interests was the extent to which participants generated either more or less
information depending on whether they were experiencing affective coherence or affective
incoherence. We considered two distinct possibilities. If affective coherence results in fluency
that facilitates processing generally, then participants in the coherent conditions might be more
generative in their narratives That is, affective coherence should facilitate the fluency of their
written expression generally, leading to longer narratives. Alternatively, if affective
incoherence motivates an attempt to extract meaning from incoherent affective cues, then
participants in the incoherent conditions might generate more material.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Another of our interests was the qualitative content of the generated narratives. Because certain
types of words are associated with cognitive complexity (Pennebaker & Stone, 2003), we
examined the content of the narratives. In particular, we tested whether differences in affective
coherence would affect linguistic markers of complexity (e.g., Pennebaker, Mayne & Francis,
1997; Pennebaker & Stone, 2003). These markers include the use of big words (> six letters)
and words related to causation and insight. Pennebaker and colleagues also found that the
content of narratives tends to change over time (Pennebaker & Francis, 1996; Pennebaker,
Mayne & Francis, 1997; Pennebaker & Stone, 2003). They showed that improvements in
adjustment across writing sessions correlated with increased use of causal and insight words,
suggesting that people had come to a more meaningful understanding of the unpleasant life
events. To determine whether temporal factors might also influence the degree to which
affective coherence influenced self-generated narrative content, we analyzed changes in story
content across narratives.
Thus, the question posed in Study 5 was whether affective coherence would influence general
processing efficiency, such as the length and complexity of the narratives that the participants
produced, or whether such differences would be specifically related to meaning-making - the
"emergent meaning" of the narrative generated
Method
Participants—Participants were 144 undergraduate students (85 female) from the University
of Virginia who participated to fulfill a course requirement, with a mean age of 19.17 years.
The data of 11 participants were eliminated from analyses because they demonstrated suspicion
about the purpose of the study.

J Pers Soc Psychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 May 2.

Centerbar et al.

Page 20

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Procedure—The procedure was similar to that used in Study 4, with the following exceptions.
Participants were given the same Scrambled Sentences Task as in Study 1–Study 3, and were
then instructed to engage in muscle contractions associated with happy or sad expressions as
in Study 4. However, instead of reading the Paul story, they engaged in an autobiographical
recall task developed by Teasdale and Fogarty (1979), and used by Schnall and Laird (2003).
For this task, participants received a cue word (e.g., tree) while producing the emotional
expressions. Participants were asked to close their eyes while maintaining the muscle
contractions, and to think of an event from their life associated with the word. Instructions
asked them to think of the first event that came to mind, to consider what the experience was
like, and to recall the event in as much detail as possible. Afterward, they wrote down the nature
of the event, and the effect it had on them. To maximize variability in responses, this task was
not timed, and participants were simply encouraged to “write down a couple of sentences”
about the event. They then rated the event on a scale from 1 (very bad) to 7 (very good), and
the extent to which they had experienced various feelings when the event originally happened
(happy, sad, confused, angry, relaxed, afraid, depressed, upset). The same retrieval and ratings
procedure was repeated for each of three cue words: “tree,” “house,” and “car.” Then
participants indicated their feelings during the experiment using visual analogue scales for the
same adjectives (in a different order). Finally, participants filled out personality questionnaires
not pertinent to the current project.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Results
Word Count—Reports of the personal life events were analyzed using the Linguistic Inquiry
Word Count (LWIC) software (Pennebaker, Francis & Booth, 1999). The narratives resulting
from the three cue words were combined, and the total word counts obtained from the LWIC
program were submitted to an ANOVA with Priming (Happy vs. Sad) and Expression (Happy
vs. Sad) as between-subjects factors. A two-way interaction of Priming and Expression
emerged, F(1, 129) = 5.21, p = .02, η2 = .04, with higher overall mean word count for
participants in the affectively incoherent conditions, compared to those in the coherent
conditions (see Table 3). Thus, affective coherence led to more shorter, more concise narratives
than did affective coherence.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Cognitive Complexity—We examined the degree to which differences in affective
coherence may have influenced changes in the content of material generated across the three
narratives. For ease of interpretation, we compared those participants in the coherent conditions
(happy prime and happy expression, or sad prime and sad expression), with those in the
incoherent conditions (happy prime and sad expression, or sad prime and happy expression).
We found that participants in the coherent condition showed a linear increase in their use of
causal words (e.g., "because", "effect", "hence") across the three narratives. Participants in the
incoherent condition generated the same number of causal words across the narratives. Indeed,
a repeated measures ANOVA with Condition (coherent vs. incoherent) and Story (1 vs. 2. vs.
3) produced a significant linear trend for the interaction of Condition and Story, F(1, 131) =
5.79, p < .02, η2 = .04. Coherent participants showed a linear increase in the percentage of
causal words that they used, from .36% to .51% to .99% across the three narratives, whereas
incoherent participants showed no change, with .46%, .51% and .51% of words being causal
across the narratives.
A similar, though less pronounced pattern emerged for insight words (e.g., "think", "know",
and "consider"). In the coherent conditions, use of insight words increased from .81%, to
1.64%, to 1.45% across the three narratives. Participants in the incoherent conditions showed
no increase in their use of insight words (1.11%, 1.15% and 1.26% respectively). The quadratic
trend for the interaction of Condition and Story was marginally, significant, F(1, 131) = 2.89,
p <.09, η2 = .02.

J Pers Soc Psychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 May 2.

Centerbar et al.

Page 21

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Finally, participants in the coherent conditions used a larger number of big words (> six letters)
across time, which also is considered a marker of cognitive complexity (Pennebaker & Stone,
2003). Participants experiencing coherence used big words at a rate that increased from 11.00%
to 12.77%, to 14.10% across the narratives. Alternatively, participants experiencing
incoherence did not show such linear increase, with big words accounting for 12.80%, 12.26%
and 12.74% of words used across narratives. Indeed, the linear trend of the Condition and Story
interaction was significant, F(1, 131) = 8.95, p < .003, η2 = .06.
Word Count and Affective Categories—In addition to the markers of cognitive
complexity, we also analyzed the extent to which higher word count was associated with
affectively positive or negative words contained in the narratives. For participants in the
coherent condition, there was a marginally significant correlation between word count and use
of positive emotion words (see Table 4), which was due to a correlation between word count
and words relating to optimism. In contrast, for participants in the incoherent condition, there
was a significant correlation between word count and negative emotion words used, and in
particular, words relating to sadness. Thus, the longer the narrative, the more positive emotion
words were used by coherent participants and the more negative emotion words were used by
incoherent participants.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Affective Content—We further compared the coherent and incoherent conditions in terms
of the positive and negative affect categories across the three narratives using a series of
repeated measures ANOVAs. No significant effects for Condition or for the Condition X Story
interaction emerged, consistent with Pennebaker, Mehl and Niederhoffer’s (2003) conclusion
that actual affective content is often less diagnostic of psychological processes than linguistic
style.
Participants’ Evaluations of the Narratives—For each narrative, participants rated the
overall valence of the recalled event, as well as how they felt during that event when it originally
happened. Whereas narrative content, as assessed by LWIC, did not show differences across
the groups, participants’ self-reported evaluations of the events did. Over time, people in the
incoherent condition rated their narratives as getting progressively worse on several
dimensions, while no such linear trend was apparent for the coherent condition. Linear trend
analyses for the interaction of Condition and Story confirmed the reliability of these findings.
Across the three stories, participants experiencing incoherence rated the events as getting worse
(F(1, 126) = 4.89, p < .03, η2 = .04), and themselves as less happy (F(1, 131) = 4.77, p < .03,
η2 = .04), more sad (F(1, 131) = 3.71, p <.06, η2 = .03), more depressed (F(1, 131) = 4.80, p
<.03, η2 = .04), more angry (F(1, 129) = 4.50, p <.04, η2 = .03), and more upset, (F(1, 131) =
6.52, p <.01, η2 = .03) (see Table 5 for means and SDs).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Participants’ Feelings During The Experiment—Toward the end of the experiment,
participants rated how they had been feeling throughout the experiment. Consistent with the
findings from Study 2, participants in Study 5 reported having experienced more negative affect
when they were in the incoherent condition. In particular, relative to the coherent condition
(M = .64, SD = 1.29) participants in the incoherent condition (M = 1.06, SD = 1.40) gave higher
ratings of feeling sad, F(1, 131) = 3.09, p < .08, η2 = .02, depressed (M = .44, SD = .93 vs.
M = .87, SD = 1.21), F(1, 131) = 5.22, p < .02, η2 = .04, upset (M = .52, SD = .97 vs. M = 1.02,
SD = 1.39), F(1, 131) = 5.72, p <.02, η2 = .04, angry (M = .41, SD = .88 vs. M = .71, SD =
1.20), F(1, 131) = 2.83, p <.09, η2 = .02, and afraid (M = .40, SD = .67 vs. M = .71, SD = 1.12),
F(1, 131) = 3.52, p <.06, η2 = .03. Thus, the consequences of affective incoherence concerned
not only the content of the narratives that participants produced, but were also reflected in their
reported feelings of negative affect while generating the narratives.

J Pers Soc Psychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 May 2.

Centerbar et al.

Page 22

Discussion

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Study 5 explored whether the effects observed in Study 1–Study 4 might reflect a generalized
experience of fluency, with accompanying epistemic benefits or costs (e.g. Tamir et al.,
2002). Results suggested that affective incoherence led to an experience of disfluency and
carried epistemic costs. Compared to affective coherence, affective incoherence produced selfgenerated narratives that were less concise, interconnected, insightful and articulate. These
narratives were unaccompanied by the structural markers typical of improved cognitive
functioning over time (cf. Pennebaker et al., 2003). Alternatively, participants in the coherent
conditions, although they wrote less overall, showed a general increase in cognitive complexity
across the three writing samples. Increases in cognitive complexity have been associated with
beneficial health outcomes, presumably because they reflect increased understanding (see
Pennebaker et al., 2003). Such an interpretation of differences in cognitive complexity markers
in our data would suggest that participants in the coherent condition achieved a higher level of
understanding of the life events they described, using fewer words to do so. Pennebaker and
colleagues noted, “… it is striking how weakly emotion words predict people’s emotional state
(Pennebaker, Mehl & Niedenhoffer, 2003, p. 571).” Our data were consistent with this
conclusion, because the emotion words used in the narratives did not vary as a function of
affective coherence condition. However, there was a tendency for the affectively incoherent
conditions to generate more negative events over time. Finally, we replicated the mood results
from Study 2, demonstrating differences in self-reported feelings as a function of affective
coherence. Interestingly, rather than finding differences in positive affect, as demonstrated in
the fluency literature, we found that disfluency was associated with increases in negative affect.
Along with the findings of Study 1–Study 4, the results of Study 5 suggest that affective
coherence may influence cognitive processing because of its epistemic benefits. The written
expressions generally suggest a concern with arriving at coherent meaning. Individuals
experiencing affective coherence responded in their narrative with greater insightfulness and
understanding of causation.

General Discussion

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Four experiments found that the recall of affective material from a story depended on whether
experiential information was coherent with conceptualized affect. In each experiment, when
experiential cues were inconsistent with primed affective concepts, memory suffered. This
same phenomenon emerged regardless of whether the experiential cues were from affectively
relevant actions, feelings, or expressions. A fifth study provided evidence consistent with the
hypothesis that affective coherence has epistemic benefits. We employed a variety of
manipulations and measures to examine the implications of affective coherence. For example,
affectively relevant concepts were indirectly primed in Study 1–Study 3 and Study 5, and
subliminally primed in Study 4. Experiential information included the direct experience of
affect in the form of mood (Study 3), but also experiences of affectively relevant actions (Study
1 and Study 2), and expressions (Study 4 and Study 5). In addition, memory was measured by
recall of a story (Study 1–Study 4) or by autobiographical recall (Study 5). Consistent effects
and patterns of findings were generated across all five studies.
Despite such variation in method and measures, these experiments focused only on the
coherence with respect to affective valence. One can imagine similar research examining the
affective coherence with respect to arousal. Just as valence provides information about value,
arousal provides information about importance (Clore & Schnall, 2005). Thus, to be credible,
affective concepts implying great importance or urgency should be accompanied by
experiences, actions, or expressions that also imply importance or urgency.

J Pers Soc Psychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 May 2.

Centerbar et al.

Page 23

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

In the emotion literature, research on coherence has been directed toward questions about the
nature of emotion. Are emotions tightly bound, evolved modules whose existence is reflected
in expressions, feelings, and patterns of physiology that show coherence, or does the absence
of high levels of coherence among emotional responses require a revision in our concept of
emotion (Barrett, 2006)? The current results do not speak to that question. However, emotion
coherence could also be examined within the current model. To the extent that specific
emotions are believed to imply particular experiences, then one might expect that coherence
and incoherence between emotion concepts and emotion symptoms might have effects on
cognitive performance similar to those observed in these studies.

Context Dependency

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

We have emphasized how embodied experiences of affect can function as evidence relevant
to affective thoughts. In that sense, people in everyday life act like scientists (Kelly, 1963),
continually testing the appropriateness of affective conceptions of events against embodied
affective experiences of them. But in everyday perception, as in science, an item of data never
speaks for itself. The sensations of our senses have meaning only in context. In this article, we
opted for the term “coherence” to reflect the crucial role of context. A term such as “agreement”
might imply equality or interchangeability among the affective cues, something prior data
suggest is not the case. For example, the affective impact of approach-avoidance action
(Centerbar & Clore, 2006) or head nods and shakes (Briñol & Petty, 2003; Tamir et al.,
2004) is not fixed, but variable. Generally our data showed no direct effects of experiential
inputs on either affect or performance.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

In our research, and presumably in the real world, affective concepts and experiential cues
show a curious symbiosis. The concepts provide a context within which actions, feelings, and
expressions take on affective meaning, which then provides evidence of the validity of the
concept. Neisser (1976) made a related point when he indicated a preference for talking about
a “perceptual cycle” rather than a “perception.” His point was that perceptual data are given
meaning by their cognitive context, but that the validity of the cognitions in any given situation
in turn depends on perceptual data. Indeed, we found that flexing the muscles involved in arm
extension could have positive or negative affective meaning depending on whether positive
concepts or negative concepts were made more accessible through priming (Study 1 and Study
2). Only after this process of acquiring affective meaning from the activated concepts could
the experience of arm extension validate or invalidate those same concepts. Thus, a primed
negative concept made the act of extending one’s arm in that context a positive action, because
avoidance is a motivationally appropriate reaction to negative objects. The affective coherence
of this combination validated the appropriateness of the negative concept, which allowed
attention to be paid to the subsequent task.
Similarly, a primed positive concept made the same act of extending one’s arm negative,
because avoidance is a motivationally inappropriate reaction to positive objects. The affective
incoherence of this combination invalidated the applicability of the positive concept, so that
participants were left with an affective problem to resolve before they could attend fully to task
demands.
It is important to re-emphasize that in these configurations an avoidance action and a negative
concept, for example, were affectively coherent because avoidance is a motivationally
appropriate reaction to negative stimuli, not because avoidance is inherently negative. It all
depends on what is being avoided, a point also made long ago by Heider (1958).
It should be clear that context dependency is often a critical part of affective coherence. As a
result of acquiring meaning from context, embodied responses can serve as evidence for the

J Pers Soc Psychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 May 2.

Centerbar et al.

Page 24

concepts. The epistemic benefits and costs of validation and invalidation are assumed to be
reflected in the relative ease or fluency of processing.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Fluency
One way to characterize these effects is to say that affective coherence produces the experience
of fluency. Recent evidence in the study of conceptual and perceptual fluency has identified
two hallmarks associated with that experience. First, fluency has been shown to produce
positive affect, measured both in terms of self-reported feelings and changes in physiology.
Second, fluency has been shown to have asymmetrical effects, producing changes in positive,
but not in negative affect (Winkielman & Cacioppo, 2001). Some evidence from the current
studies is consistent with a fluency interpretation.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Affective coherence not only caused differences in recall, but also differences in self-reported
mood, at least when measured shortly after the experience. In Study 2, participants reported
feeling more positive affect (cheerful, delighted, pleased and relaxed) under conditions of
affective coherence. Thus, like fluency, affective coherence may lead to positive affect. These
same participants also reported feeling less negative affect (gloomy, distressed), which
contrasts with the emotional asymmetry observed in the fluency literature (Harmon-Jones &
Allen, 2001;Winkielman & Cacioppo, 2001). We also found that affective incoherence
produced higher reports of negative affect (Study 5). We were careful to use unipolar scales
for assessing negative affect, but Winkielman and Cacciopo (2001) have argued that people
may report their negative affect essentially by assessing their positive affect and reversing that
assessment. It remains for future investigations to determine whether differences in both
positive and negative affect occur as a function of affective coherence.

Sense-making

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

If affective coherence is a form of fluency, we would expect the kinds of processing efficiency
and positive affect that we observed. Additionally, we propose that such coherence had the
epistemic benefits of making sense of one’s affective reactions (Study 5). In this regard, we
identified reliable differences on measures developed by Pennebaker and colleagues to
demonstrate the psychological and health benefits of explaining negative life events. We found
that such meaning-making may also be applicable to positive events. In related research,
Wilson, Centerbar, Kermer, and Gilbert (2005) have shown that making sense of positive
experiences speeds the dissipation of the associated positive affect. In such cases, sense-making
may thus seem to have adverse consequences, at least in terms of ongoing mood. These two
sets of results are not, however, in conflict. Wilson et al. showed that successful sense-making
results in thinking less about one’s mood, thus reducing its intensity and duration. They suggest
that this allows people to move on from their affective experiences, and we are making a similar
point. That is, affective coherence may be beneficial for subsequent processing by allowing
people to turn their attention away from their affect to more fully engage ongoing tasks.

Related Conceptualizations
We offer the notion of affective coherence as a general affective principle with potentially wide
applicability, including potential relevance to research on emotion regulation (Richards &
Gross, 1999, 2000), motor behaviors (Briñnol & Petty, 2003; Cacioppo et al., 1993; Förster &
Strack, 1996, 1997, 1998; Neumann & Strack, 2000), self-validation (Briñol & Petty, 2003;
Petty et al., 2002), and confirmation of self-beliefs (Tamir et al., 2002).
Further, relevant data come from research on persuasion. According to the self-validation
hypothesis (Petty et al., 2002), the influence of persuasive arguments on attitudes is not only
a function of the impact of the arguments on the magnitude (extent of thought) and direction
J Pers Soc Psychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 May 2.

Centerbar et al.

Page 25

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

(valence of thoughts) parameters, but additionally on the metacognitive aspects of people's
confidence in their thoughts. They demonstrated that high confidence increases the impact of
both positive and negative persuasive messages, and that low confidence reduces their impact.
Briñol and Petty (2003) further demonstrated that actions such as head nodding (agreement)
and head shaking (disagreement) can have effects on persuasion by influencing interacting
with the valence or strength of persuasive messages. Briñol and Petty (2003) likewise refer to
these actions as validating or invalidating one's thoughts about persuasive messages, albeit
through the effect that they have on confidence. Whereas these authors have focused on the
role of action in validating or invalidating specific thoughts, our focus on affective coherence
has emphasized the benefits for subsequent processing.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Also related to the current conceptualization is the affective certainty hypothesis (Tamir et al.,
2002). Like the self-validation hypothesis of Briñol and colleagues, it focuses on the degree to
which momentary affective inputs are either consistent or inconsistent with cognitions, in this
case self-beliefs rather than responses to persuasive arguments. However, like us, they
emphasize the epistemic benefits of the fit between these momentary affective experiences and
chronic affective beliefs. In their case, the benefits were evident in fast reaction times for
identifying things that participants did or did not want. As such, affective certainty can be
considered an example of affective coherence, where the domain of one’s belief happens to
concern information about oneself (e.g., one’s personality) rather than more general
information about affective concepts.

Conclusions

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Emotion and memory has been a popular topic in psychology. Studies have generally examined
the role of affective valence (e.g., Bower, 1981), affective arousal (e.g., Cahill & McGaugh,
1998), or affective intensity (Loftus & Burns, 1982). We examined a different kind of affective
influence. The memory effects observed here lay not in affect itself, but in whether cognitive
and experiential manifestations of affect were coherent. We began this article by alluding to
Descartes’ declarations about the primacy of thought, which we contrasted to the
pronouncements of Jefferson concerning the primacy of feeling. Our results suggest that
beyond the roles of concepts and feelings, what is important is their coherence. Rather than
questions of whether cognitive or bodily cues dominate behavior, as has been the focus of prior
work (e.g., Loewenstein, 1996), we emphasized their joint action. Performance on a memory
task depended on the agreement between the cognitive content made accessible by priming
and the self-generated experiences of action, feeling, and expression. We suggest that this kind
of mind-body coherence and incoherence was important in part because it governed the extent
to which individuals could fully engage the experimental task and hence how much they could
retrieve from memory.
Author Note
David B. Centerbar and Gerald L. Clore, Department of Psychology, University of Virginia. Simone Schnall,
University of Plymouth, UK. Erika Garvin, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign.
Support is acknowledged from National Institute of Mental Health Research grants MH50074 to Gerald Clore and
MH67580 to Simone Schnall. We wish to thank Tim Wilson for his helpful comments on earlier drafts of the manuscript
and members of the Social Cognition Laboratory for their support.
Portions of these research results (Study 1 and Study 2) were previously presented at a 2004 SPSP Annual Meeting
poster session, and included as part of the primary author's dissertation thesis. Study 4 was previously included in the
4th author's master's thesis.
The first and second authors contributed equally to this project. Correspondence for David B. Centerbar should be to
David B. Centerbar, University of Massachusetts Medical School, 222 Maple Avenue, Shrewsbury, MA 01545. Email: david.centerbar@umassmed.edu

J Pers Soc Psychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 May 2.

Centerbar et al.

Page 26
Correspondence for Simone Schnall should be sent to Simone Schnall, University of Plymouth, School of Psychology,
Portland Square, Drake Circus, Plymouth, PL4 8AA, UK. Email: simone.schnall@plymouth.ac.uk.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

References

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Bargh JA, Bond RN, Lombardi WJ, Tota ME. The additive nature of chronic and temporary sources of
construct accessibility. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 1986;50:869–878.
Bargh JA, Pietromonaco P. Automatic information processing and social perception: The influence of
trait information presented outside of conscious awareness on impression formation. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology 1982;43:437–449.
Barrett LF. Are emotions natural kinds? Perspectives on Psychological Science 2006;1:28–58.
. Barsalou LW. Perceptual symbol systems. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 1999;22:577–660. [PubMed:
11301525]
. Baumeister RF, Bratslavsky E, Muraven M, Tice DM. Ego depletion: Is the self a limited resource?
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 1998;74:1252–1265. [PubMed: 9599441]
Bodenhausen GV, Kramer GP, Süusser K. Happiness and stereotypic thinking in social judgment. Journal
of Personality and Social Psychology 1994;66:621–632.
Bonanno GA, Keltner D. The coherence of emotion systems: Comparing 'on-line' measures of appraisal
and facial expressions, and self-report. Cognition and Emotion 2004;18:431–444.
Bower GH. Mood and memory. American Psychologist 1981;36:129–148. [PubMed: 7224324]
Bower GH, Gilligan SG, Monteiro KP. Selectivity of learning caused by affective states. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General 1981;110:451–473.
Briñol P, Petty R. Overt head movements and persuasion: A self-validation analysis. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology 2003;84:1123–1139. [PubMed: 12793580]
Cacioppo JT, Priester JR, Berntson GG. Rudimentary determinants of attitudes. II: Arm flexion and
extension have differential effects on attitudes. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology
1993;65:5–17. [PubMed: 8355142]
Cahill L, McGaugh JL. Mechanisms of emotional arousal and lasting declarative memory. Trends in
Neuroscience 1998;21:294–299.
Centerbar DB, Clore GL. Do approach-avoidance actions create attitudes? Psychological Science
2006;17:22–29. [PubMed: 16371140]
Chen M, Bargh JA. Consequences of automatic evaluation: Immediate behavioral predispositions to
approach or avoid the stimulus. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin 1999;45:215–224.
Clark, A. Being there: Putting the brain, body, and world together again. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press;
1997.
Clore, GL.; Gasper, K. Feeling is believing: Some affective influences on belief. In: Frida, NH.; Manstead,
A., editors. Emotions and belief: How feelings influence thoughts. Studies in emotion and social
interaction. New York, NY: Cambridge University Press; 2000. p. 10-44.
Clore, GL.; Schnall, S. The influence of affect on attitude. In: Albarracin, D.; Johnson, BT.; Zanna, MP.,
editors. The handbook of attitudes. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum; 2005. p. 437-489.
Clore, GL.; Storbeck, J. Affect as information about liking, efficacy, and importance. In: Forgas, J., editor.
Hearts and Minds: Affective influences on social cognition and behaviour. New York: Psychology
Press; in press
Costin F. The scrambled sentence test: A group measure of hostility. Educational and Psychological
Measurement 1969;29:461–468.
Descartes, R. Discourse on the method of rightly conducting the reason, and seeking truth in the sciences.
Raleigh, N. C.: Alex Catalogue, netLibrary eBook; 1641.
Duclos SE, Laird JD, Schneider E, Sexter M, Stern L, Van Lighten O. Emotion-specific effects of facial
expressions and postures on emotional experience. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology
1989;57:100–108.
Flack WF Jr, Laird JD, Cavallaro LA. Separate and combined effects of facial expressions and bodily
postures on emotional feelings. European Journal of Social Psychology 1999;29:203–217.

J Pers Soc Psychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 May 2.

Centerbar et al.

Page 27

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Förster J, Higgins ET, Idson LC. Approach and avoidance strength during goal attainment: Regulatory
focus and the "goal looms larger" effect. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 1998;75:1115–
1131. [PubMed: 9866180]
Förster J, Strack F. Influence of overt head movements on memory for valenced words: A case of
conceptual-motor compatibility. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 1996;71:421–430.
[PubMed: 8831156]
Förster J, Strack F. Motor actions in retrieval of valenced information: A motor congruence effect.
Perceptual and Motor Skills 1997;85:1419–1427. [PubMed: 9450302]
Förster J, Strack F. Motor actions in retrieval of valenced information: II. Boundary conditions for motor
congruence effects. Perceptual and Motor Skills 1998;86:1423–1426. [PubMed: 9700822]
Friedman R, S, Förster J. The effect of approach and avoidance motor actions on the elements of creative
insight. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 2000;79:477–492. [PubMed: 11045734]
Glenberg AM. What memory is for. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 1997;20:1–55. [PubMed: 10096994]
Harmon-Jones E, Allen JJB. The role of affect in the mere exposure effect: Evidence from
psychophysiological and individual differences approaches. Personality and Social Psychology
Bulletin 2001;27:889–898.
Heider, F. The psychology of interpersonal relations. New York: John Wiley & Sons; 1958.
Higgins ET. Beyond pleasure and pain. American Psychologist 1997;52:1280–1300. [PubMed: 9414606]
Higgins ET. Making a good decision: Value from fit. American Psychologist 2000;55:1217–1230.
[PubMed: 11280936]
Jefferson, T. Letter to John Adams dated August 15, 1820. In: Koch, A.; Peden, W., editors. The life and
selected writings of Thomas Jefferson (1993). New York, NY: The Modern Library; 18201993.
Kelly, GA. A theory of personality: The psychology of personal constructs. New York: Norton &
Company; 1963.
Kruglanski, AW. Lay epistemics and human knowledge: Cognitive and motivational bases. New York
NY: Plenum; 1989.
Laird JD, Cuniff M, Sheehan K, Shulman D, Strum G. Emotion specific effects of facial expressions on
memory for life events. Journal of Social Behavior and Personality 1989;4:87–98.
Laird JD, Wagener JJ, Halal M, Szegda M. Remembering what you feel: The effects of emotion on
memory. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 1982;42:646–658.
Lakoff, G.; Johnson, M. Philosophy in the flesh: The embodied mind and its challenge to Western thought.
New York: Basic Books; 1999.
Larsen, RJ.; Diener, E. Promises and problems with the circumplex model of emotion. In: Clark, MS.,
editor. Review of Personality and Social Psychology. 13. Newbury Park, CA: Sage; 1992. p. 25-59.
Loewenstein G. Out of control: visceral influences on behavior. Organizational Behavior and Human
Decision Processes 1996;65:272–292.
Loftus EF, Burns TE. Mental shock can produce retrograde amnesia. Memory & Cognition 1982;10:318–
323.
Markman AB, Brendl CM. Constraining theories of embodied cognition. Psychological Science
2005;16:6–10. [PubMed: 15660844]
Martin LL, Abend T, Sedikides C, Green JD. How would I feel if…? Mood as input to a role fulfillment
evaluation process. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 1997;73:242–253.
Mauss IB, Levenson RW, McCarter L, Wilhelm FH, Gross JJ. The tie that binds? Coherence among
emotion experience, behavior, and physiology. Emotion 2005;5:175–190. [PubMed: 15982083]
Neisser, U. Cognition and reality. San Francisco: Freeman; 1976.
Neumann, R.; Förster, J.; Strack, F. Motor compatibility: The bidirectional link between behavior and
evaluation. In: Musch, J.; Klauer, KC., editors. The psychology of evaluation: Affective processes
in cognition and emotion. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum; 2003. p. 371-391.
Neumann R, Strack F. Approach and avoidance: The influence of proprioceptive and exteroceptive cues
on encoding of affective information. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 2000;79:39–48.
[PubMed: 10909876]

J Pers Soc Psychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 May 2.

Centerbar et al.

Page 28

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Niedenthal PM, Barsalou L, Winkielman P, Krauth-Gruber S, Rie F. Embodiment in Attitudes, Social
Perception, and Emotion. Personality and Social Psychology Review 2005;9:184–211. [PubMed:
16083360]
Niedenthal PM, Halberstadt JB, Setterlund MB. Being happy and seeing "happy": Emotional state
mediates visual word recognition. Cognition and Emotion 1997;11:403–432.
Pennebaker, JW. Opening Up: The Healing Power of Expressing Emotions. Revised edition. New York:
Guilford Press; 1997.
Pennebaker, JW.; Francis, ME.; Booth, RJ. Linguistic Inquiry and Word Count (LIWC): A
computerbased text analysis program. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum; 1999.
Pennebaker, JW.; Francis, ME., editors. Linguistic Inquiry and Word Count (LIWC): A computerbased
text analysis program. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum; 1999.
Pennebaker JW, Mayne T, Francis ME. Linguistic predictors of adaptive bereavement. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology 1997;72:863–871. [PubMed: 9108699]
Pennebaker JW, Mehl MR, Niederhoffer KG. Psychological aspects of natural language use: Our words,
our selves. Annual Review of Psychology 2003;54:547–577.
Pennebaker JW, Stone LD. Words of wisdom: Language use over the lifespan. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology 2003;85:291–301. [PubMed: 12916571]
Petty RE, Briñol P, Tormala ZL. Thought confidence as a determinant of persuasion: The self-validation
hypothesis. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 2002;82:722–741. [PubMed: 12003473]
Reber R, Winkielman P, Schwarz N. Effects of perceptual fluency on affective judgments. Psychological
Science 1998;9:45–48.
Richards JM, Gross JL. Composure at any cost? The cognitive consequences of emotion suppression.
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin 1999;8:1033–1044.
Richards JM, Gross JL. Emotion regulation and memory: The cognitive costs of keeping one's cool.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 2000;79:410–424. [PubMed: 10981843]
Russell JA. A circumplex model of affect. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 1980;39:1161–
1178.
Schnall S, Laird JD. Keep smiling: Enduring effects of facial expressions and postures on emotional
experience and memory. Cognition and Emotion 2003;17:787–797.
Solarz AK. Latency of instrumental responses as a function of compatibility with the meaning of eliciting
verbal signs. Journal of Experimental Psychology 1960;59:239–245. [PubMed: 13832584]
Soussignan R. Duchenne smile, emotional experience, and autonomic reactivity: A test of the facial
feedback hypothesis. Emotion 2002;2:52–74. [PubMed: 12899366]
Stepper S, Strack F. Proprioceptive determinants of emotional and nonemotional feelings. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology 1993;64:211–220.
Strack F, Martin LL, Stepper S. Inhibiting and facilitating conditions of the human smile: A nonobtrusive
test of the facial feedback hypothesis. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 1988;54:768–
777. [PubMed: 3379579]
Strack F, Neumann R. "The spirit is willing, but the flesh is weak": Beyond mind-body interaction in
human decision-making. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 1996;65:300–304.
Strack F, Neumann R. Furrowing the brow may undermine perceived fame: The role of facial feedback
in judgments of celebrity. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin 2000;26:762–768.
Strack F, Schwarz N, Gschneidinger E. Happiness and reminiscing: The role of time perspective, affect,
and mode of thinking. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 1985;49:1460–1469.
Tamir M, Robinson MD, Clore GL. The epistemic benefits of trait-consistent mood states: An analysis
of extraversion and mood. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 2002;83:663–667. [PubMed:
12219861]
Tamir M, Robinson MD, Clore GL, Martin LL, Whitaker DJ. Are we puppets on a string? The contextual
meaning of unconscious expressive cues. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin 2004;30:237–
249. [PubMed: 15030636]
Teasdale JD, Fogarty SJ. Differential effects of induced mood on retrieval of pleasant and unpleasant
events from episodic memory. Journal of Abnormal Psychology 1979;88:248–257. [PubMed:
500952]

J Pers Soc Psychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 May 2.

Centerbar et al.

Page 29

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Varela, FJ.; Thompson, E.; Rosch, E. The embodied mind: Cognitive science and human experience.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press; 1991.
Vohs KD, Heatherton TF. Self-regulatory failure: A resource-depletion approach. Psychological Science
2000;11:249–254. [PubMed: 11273412]
Watson D, Tellegen A. Toward a consensual structure of mood. Psychological Bulletin 1985;98:219–
235. [PubMed: 3901060]
Wells GL, Petty RE. The effects of overt head movements on persuasion: Compatibility and
incompatibility of responses. Basic and Applied Social Psychology 1980;1:219–230.
Wilson TD, Centerbar DB, Kermer DA, Gilbert DT. The pleasures of uncertainty: Prolonging positive
moods in ways people do not appreciate. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 2005;88:5–
21. [PubMed: 15631571]
Winkielman P, Cacioppo JT. Mind at ease puts a smile on the face: Psychophysiological evidence that
processing facilitation increases positive affect. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology
2001;81:989–1000. [PubMed: 11761320]
Winkielman, P.; Schwarz, N.; Fazendeiro, TA.; Reber, R. The hedonic marking of processing fluency:
Implications for evaluative judgment. In: Musch, J.; Klauer, KC., editors. The psychology of
evaluation: Affective processes in cognition and emotion. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum; 2003.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
J Pers Soc Psychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 May 2.

Centerbar et al.

Page 30

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Figure 1.

Mean recall (+ SE) as a function of level of embodied affective cue and primed affect concept
in Study 1.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
J Pers Soc Psychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 May 2.

Centerbar et al.

Page 31

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Figure 2.

Mean recall (+ SE) as a function of level of embodied affective cue and primed affect concept
in Study 2.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
J Pers Soc Psychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 May 2.

Centerbar et al.

Page 32

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Figure 3.

Mean recall (+ SE) as a function of level of embodied affective cue and primed affect concept
in Study 3.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
J Pers Soc Psychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 May 2.

Centerbar et al.

Page 33

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Figure 4.

Mean recall (+ SE) as a function of level of embodied affective cue and primed affect concept
in Study 4.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
J Pers Soc Psychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 May 2.

Centerbar et al.

Page 34

Table 1

Mean Overall Mood as a Function of Prime and Arm Contraction in Study 2
Prime

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Arm Position:

Happy

Neutral

Sad

Flexion
Extension

7.29 (0.76)
5.83 (1.17)

Immediately
7.00 (0.71)
6.33 (1.21)

5.14 (1.07)
6.14 (1.21)

Flexion
Extension

3.83 (1.60)
5.83 (1.94)

After Delay
6.86 (1.07)
6.50 (0.93)

5.80 (1.30)
6.00(1.41)

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
J Pers Soc Psychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 May 2.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Table 2

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Arm:

1.80 (1.79)
1.20 (0.45)
1.60 (1.34)

1.57 (0.53)
2.71 (1.70)

5.60 (3.29)

7.29 (1.38)

6.00 (1.63)

3.80 (1.64)

6.86 (1.46)

2.80 (1.92)

7.00 (0.71)

7.29 (0.76)

5.86 (2.27)

Neutral
Flexion

Happy

5.00 (1.83)

3.57 (2.07)

3.57 (1.27)

2.71 (1.11)

4.71 (1.70)

4.43 (1.27)

5.14 (1.07)

Sad

Distressed

Gloomy

Delighted

Pleased

Relaxed

Cheerful

Overall Mood

Prime

4.00 (2.35)

2.40 (2.19)

3.80 (2.49)

4.40 (1.14)

5.60 (2.30)

4.80 (2.17)

5.83 (1.17)

Happy

4.17 (2.48)

3.83 (1.94)

4.50 (1.87)

4.83 (2.79)

6.17 (1.17)

5.83 (1.83)

6.33 (1.21)

Neutral
Extension

Sad

2.86 (1.46)

2.57 (1.90)

4.00 (2.16)

5.57 (0.98)

7.14 (1.35)

5.29 (2.06)

6.14 (1.21)

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Mean Level of Self-reported Feelings as a Function of Prime and Arm Contraction in Study 2
Centerbar et al.
Page 35

J Pers Soc Psychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 May 2.

Centerbar et al.

Page 36

Table 3

Mean Overall Word Count as a Function of Priming and Expression in Study 5
Prime

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Expression:

Happy

Sad

Happy
Sad

Word Count
48.00 (14.58)
56.21 (19.78)

57.88 (19.06)
51.88 (17.46)

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
J Pers Soc Psychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 May 2.

Centerbar et al.

Page 37

Table 4

Intercorrelations Between Word Count and Affective Linguistic Categories as a Function of Affective Coherence
in Study 5

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Coherence Condition
Feeling

Coherent

Incoherent

All Positive Emotions
Positive Feelings
Optimism

Positive Emotions
.24
.06
.37b

−.13
−.12
.11

All Negative Emotions
Anxiety
Anger
Sadness

Negative Emotions
.16
.02
.05
.14

.24a
−.01
.04
.29a

a

significant at .05 alpha level.

b

significant .005 alpha level.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
J Pers Soc Psychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 May 2.

Centerbar et al.

Page 38

Table 5

Mean Level of Affective Evaluations of Recalled Life Events in Study 5
Condition

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

All

Coherent

Incoherent

Overall Good
Happy
Sad
Depressed
Angry
Upset
Afraid
Confused
Relaxed
Overall Good
Happy
Sad
Depressed
Angry
Upset
Afraid
Confused
Relaxed

Event 1

Event 2

Event 3

4.64 (1.92)
4.95 (3.18)
2.20 (2.70)
1.35 (2.26)
1.79 (2.47)
2.82 (3.34)
3.17 (3.40)
1.54 (2.19)
4.35 (3.27)
5.13 (1.66)
5.81 (2.71)
1.65 (2.15)
1.04 (1.75)
1.35 (2.13)
2.05 (2.87)
2.54 (3.09)
1.81 (2.46)
4.96 (3.08)

4.52 (1.79)
5.14 (3.11)
2.39 (2.78)
1.40 (2.25)
1.75 (2.77)
2.74 (3.03)
2.34 (2.94)
1.59 (2.38)
3.71 (2.80)
5.00 (1.52)
5.47 (2.66)
2.47 (2.71)
1.37 (2.02)
1.72 (2.32)
2.45 (2.76)
2.05 (2.57)
2.07 (2.51)
4.02 (2.95)

4.33 (2.21)
4.60 (3.78)
2.37 (3.07)
1.28 (2.30)
2.25 (2.91)
2.94 (3.43)
2.96 (2.99)
2.27 (2.55)
2.95 (2.83)
3.76 (2.08)
3.63 (3.67)
3.06 (2.97)
1.99 (2.60)
3.15 (3.16)
4.16 (3.57)
3.59 (3.14)
2.84 (2.96)
2.53 (2.95)

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
J Pers Soc Psychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 May 2.

View publication stats

