CORRECTED FEBRUARY 14, 2008; SEE LAST PAGE

INTERPERSONAL RELATIONS AND GROUP PROCESSES

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Individual Differences in the Regulation of Intergroup Bias: The Role of
Conflict Monitoring and Neural Signals for Control
David M. Amodio

Patricia G. Devine

New York University

University of Wisconsin—Madison

Eddie Harmon-Jones
Texas A&M University
Low-prejudice people vary considerably in their ability to regulate intergroup responses. The authors
hypothesized that this variability arises from a neural mechanism for monitoring conflict between
automatic race-biased tendencies and egalitarian intentions. In Study 1, they found that low-prejudice
participants whose nonprejudiced responses are motivated by internal (but not external) factors exhibited
better control on a stereotype-inhibition task than did participants motivated by a combination of internal
and external factors. This difference was associated with greater conflict-monitoring activity, measured
by event-related potentials, when responses required stereotype inhibition. Study 2 demonstrated that
group differences were specific to response control in the domain of prejudice. Results indicate that
conflict monitoring, a preconscious component of response control, accounts for variability in intergroup
bias among low-prejudice participants.
Keywords: prejudice, control, ERP, ERN, conflict monitoring

unclear. The present research builds on recent advances in cognitive neuroscience to illuminate this mechanism and to apply it to
an issue that has long perplexed researchers of prejudice: Why are
some egalitarians better than others at responding without prejudice? To date, the prejudice and stereotyping literature has paid
little attention to individual differences among low-prejudice people’s ability to respond without bias and has been virtually silent
on the mechanism that underlies these differences.

Especially when inner conflict is present, people put brakes upon their
prejudices. They do not act them out— or they act them out only up
to a certain point. Something stops the logical progression somewhere. (Allport, 1954, p. 332)

Since the publication of The Nature of Prejudice in 1954,
Allport’s observation that intergroup responses often require regulation has received volumes of empirical support (Devine &
Monteith, 1999). Yet half a century later, the mechanisms through
which regulatory processes inhibit unwanted racial biases remain

Individual Differences in Responding Without Prejudice
Social psychological research on prejudice control has traditionally
focused on how attitudes of high- versus low-prejudice people affect
their behaviors. In this literature, prejudice control refers to responding with one’s egalitarian intention despite the activation of countervailing racial stereotypes. Generally speaking, low-prejudice people
are motivated to exert control in their intergroup responses, whereas
high-prejudice people are not (Devine, 1989). However, growing
evidence suggests that low-prejudice people vary substantially in their
effectiveness in regulating expressions of race bias (Devine, Monteith,
Zuwerink, & Elliot, 1991; Dovidio, Kawakami, & Gaertner, 2002;
Gaertner & Dovidio, 1986). For example, when asked how one
should respond toward a Black person versus how one actually would
respond in an interaction, many low-prejudice people reveal substantial discrepancies between how they should and would behave (Devine et al., 1991). Low-prejudice participants with large should/would
discrepancies are more prone to unintentional expressions of bias,
especially in situations involving high cognitive load, in which regu-

David M. Amodio, Department of Psychology, New York University;
Patricia G. Devine, Department of Psychology, University of Wisconsin—
Madison; Eddie Harmon-Jones, Department of Psychology, Texas A&M
University.
This research was funded by National Science Foundation Grants BCS9910702 and BCS 0350435, National Institutes of Health Grant T32MH18931, an APA Dissertation Research Award, and a University of
Wisconsin Dissertation Fellowship. This research was conducted as part of
David M. Amodio’s doctoral dissertation at the University of Wisconsin—
Madison. The dissertation upon which this article is based received the
2004 Dissertation Award from the Society for the Psychological Study of
Social Issues. We thank dissertation-committee members Lyn Abramson,
John Curtin, Richard Davidson, and Jane Allyn Piliavin. We also thank
Alison Covert, Annmarie Crampton, Sigan Hartley, and Jennifer Kubota
for their assistance in data collection.
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to David M.
Amodio, Department of Psychology, New York University, 6 Washington
Place, New York, NY 10003. E-mail: david.amodio@nyu.edu

Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 2008, Vol. 94, No. 1, 60 –74
Copyright 2008 by the American Psychological Association 0022-3514/08/$12.00
DOI: 10.1037/0022-3514.94.1.60

60

ROLE OF CONFLICT MONITORING IN INTERGROUP BIAS

lation is difficult (Monteith & Voils, 1998). These studies provided
strong evidence that many low-prejudice people lack the regulatory
abilities to inhibit effects of implicit racial bias, especially in situations
that limit their opportunity to deliberate when making a response.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Internal and External Motivations to Respond Without
Prejudice
Recent research on issues of prejudice control suggests that
differences in regulatory ability among low-prejudice people may
be linked to their motivations to respond without prejudice. Plant
and Devine (1998) observed that nonprejudiced responses are
typically driven by a combination of two independent sources of
motivation: internal (personal) and external (normative; see also
Dunton & Fazio, 1997). Plant and Devine developed the internal
motivation scale (IMS) and external motivation scale (EMS) to
assess these two motivations and found scores on the IMS and
EMS to be uncorrelated across several samples. IMS was strongly
associated with low-prejudice attitudes and predicted participants’
explicit responses when in private. Although EMS was not associated with domain-general measures of social desirability (e.g.,
Social Desirability Scale, Crowne & Marlowe, 1960; SelfMonitoring Scale, Snyder & Gangestad, 1986), it predicted higher
anxiety and less-biased behavior when intergroup responses were
to be made in public. Additional research has addressed the possibility that people who report strong external motivations are not
sincere when they also report strong internal motivations. However, these studies demonstrated that high-IMS/high-EMS participants’ intentions to respond in an egalitarian manner are experienced as a moral responsibility that cuts across situations and leads
to efforts to control bias even in the absence of external pressure
(Plant & Devine, 1998; Plant, Devine, & Brazy, 2003; Plant,
Vance, & Devine, 2007). The overarching program of research
conducted by Plant, Devine, and their colleagues has shown that
the IMS/EMS framework is able to explain a wider range of
intergroup behaviors than traditional attitude measures of prejudice. For the present purposes, the IMS/EMS framework is useful
for understanding why some low-prejudice people are more effective regulators of intergroup responses than are others.
According to the IMS/EMS framework, all low-prejudice people are highly internally motivated to respond without prejudice,
but they vary in their sensitivity to normative proscriptions of bias.
Research by Devine, Plant, Amodio, Harmon-Jones, and Vance
(2002) explored the possibility that the variance in external motivations among high-IMS participants is associated with differences in their ability to regulate intergroup response. Devine et al.
(2002) theorized that different combinations of internal and external motivations corresponded to people’s internalization of nonprejudiced standards into their automatic response tendencies. In
building their proposal, they drew upon theorizing in the goals and
motivation literature that describes how an extrinsically motivated
behavior transitions to being one that is intrinsically motivated.
According to self-determination theory (Deci & Ryan, 2000),
behaviors motivated by purely extrinsic reasons are implemented
only under external pressures. Thus, extrinsic behaviors are not
internalized and tend to be inconsistent across situations. As an
individual begins to adopt an intrinsic motivation for the same
behavior, their behavior becomes motivated by a combination of
extrinsic and intrinsic motives. This dual-motive state is charac-

61

terized by having a behavioral intention that is held consciously
and implemented in highly deliberative responses but not entrained
at more automatic levels and thus not effectively implemented in
less deliberative responses. Finally, behaviors motivated by purely
intrinsic reasons are characterized as highly internalized and wellrehearsed and are effectively implemented and highly stable across
situations. The motivational profiles provided by selfdetermination theory correspond closely with the IMS/EMS
framework and suggest that low-prejudice people motivated primarily for internal reasons should be more effective regulators of
intergroup responses than those motivated for a combination of
internal and external reasons.
Consistent with this hypothesis, Devine et al. (2002) found that
among low-prejudice people, those who were primarily internally
motivated (high-IMS/low-EMS participants) were effective in responding without prejudice when their responses were easy to
control (e.g., self-report) as well as those that are difficult to
control (e.g., physiological and reaction-time measures of bias;
Amodio et al., 2003; Devine et al., 2002). By contrast, those
motivated by a combination of internal and external motivations
(high-IMS/high-EMS participants) were effective in responding
without prejudice when their responses were easy to control but
showed unintentional expressions of bias when their responses
were more difficult to control. A third group of individuals, who
were not internally motivated (low-IMS participants), exhibited
bias on all measures, irrespective of their external concerns (given
that responses were made privately). With regard to our central
question, this research suggests that high-IMS/low-EMS individuals are good regulators across measures because they have a
strong internalized sense for when control is needed, whereas
high-IMS/high-EMS individuals are comparatively poor regulators
because this internal impetus to control is weaker. This is consistent with the self-determination-theory position that these individuals are still in the process of internalizing egalitarian responses
into their dominant response set.
The findings and theoretical analysis of Devine et al. (2002; also
Amodio et al., 2003) imply that low-prejudice people who are poor
regulators of intergroup responses may have trouble determining
when control is needed, particularly in situations that do not afford
deliberative responding. This analysis suggests that these individuals may be impaired in a nondeliberative aspect of control that is
not addressed in extant social psychological models (e.g., Wegener
& Petty, 1997; Wilson & Brekke, 1994). In the next section, we
describe a neurocognitive model of control that distinguishes between a nondeliberative process of determining the need for control and a more deliberative process of implementing control.

Neurocognitive Model of Control
Recent theorizing in the cognitive neuroscience literature suggests that response control involves two distinct processing components, each associated with activity of separate neural structures
(Botvinick, Braver, Barch, Carter, & Cohen, 2001). The first is an
evaluative component that monitors ongoing responses and is
sensitive to conflict between alternative response tendencies. Research suggests that this conflict-monitoring process is constantly
active, requires few cognitive resources, and operates below conscious awareness (Berns, Cohen, & Mintun, 1997; Nieuwenhuis,
Ridderinkhof, Blom, Band, & Kok, 2001). When conflicting re-

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

62

AMODIO, DEVINE, AND HARMON-JONES

sponse tendencies are activated, this process alerts a second,
resource-dependent regulative component to override the unwanted tendency with an intentional response. The activity level of
the conflict-monitoring process is commensurate with the degree
of response conflict, and as such, this model represents a “nonhomuncular” mechanism for signaling the need for control. Eventrelated potential (ERP) and functional magnetic resonance imaging research have associated the conflict-monitoring process with
activity in the dorsal anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) and the
regulative component with activity in the dorsolateral prefrontal
cortex (Botvinick, Nystrom, Fissel, Carter, & Cohen, 1999; Carter
et al., 1998). Tests of this model have shown that activation of the
ACC is high when prepotent responses are at odds with one’s
consciously intended response, such as in the color-naming Stroop
task (MacDonald, Cohen, Stenger, & Carter, 2000), the go/no-go
task (Kiehl, Liddle, & Hopfinger, 2001), and the Eriksen flankers
task (Botvinick et al., 1999).
When applied to the question of why high-IMS/high-EMS individuals have difficulty regulating their intergroup responses, the
neurocognitive model suggests the possibility that the conflictmonitoring process of these individuals is not sufficiently engaged
when an automatic stereotyping tendency is activated. A lack of
conflict at this basic neural level would occur if egalitarian intentions are not strongly represented at a basic, automatic level and
thus do not come into competition with the automatic-level stereotyping tendency. It is also possible that the regulative component of control may contribute to regulatory failures. However, this
system tends to be linked to more deliberative, consciously guided
behaviors. Given past work showing that high-IMS/high-EMS
participants and high-IMS/low-EMS participants are equally effective at regulating intergroup responses when deliberation is
possible, it is unlikely that the regulative component would explain
differences in their ability to regulate nondeliberative behaviors, as
observed by Devine et al. (2002) and Amodio et al. (2003).
Following this line of reasoning, we hypothesized that differential
sensitivity of the conflict-monitoring process to stereotype-related
conflict may account for differences in intergroup response regulation between low-prejudice people characterized by high IMS/
low EMS and those characterized by high IMS/high EMS.

Measuring Conflict Monitoring With ERPs
Conflict-monitoring processes associated with the ACC may be
measured in real time with ERPs. ERPs are electroencephalographic (EEG) signals that reflect a concerted firing of neurons
associated with a discrete psychological event (Coles, Gratton, &
Fabiani, 1990). The high temporal resolution of ERPs, when
measured at high sampling rates, permits researchers to examine
the neural activity of a psychological response as it unfolds over
milliseconds. The error-related negativity (ERN) component of the
ERP has been used as an index of conflict monitoring in much
research (Gehring & Fencsik, 2001; Luu, Collins, & Tucker, 2000;
Yeung, Botvinick, & Cohen, 2004). The ERN is a response-locked
negative-polarity wave that peaks approximately at the time a
response is made (Gehring, Goss, Coles, Meyer, & Donchin,
1993). It is most strongly pronounced at the frontocentral midline
scalp region and has been demonstrated to originate from the
dorsal ACC (Dehaene, Posner, & Tucker, 1994; van Veen &
Carter, 2002). ERNs are sensitive to conflicts resulting in errors

(i.e., failed control) and are therefore useful for examining the role
of conflict monitoring when attempts to respond without bias fail.
The ERN reflects neural sensitivity to conflict between an intended
response and an alternative (incorrect) response that is in the
process of being executed. The conflict-monitoring signal is stronger for errors than for correct responses, because for an error, the
conflicting behavior is further along in its implementation, and the
net level of conflict is therefore much greater (Yeung et al., 2004).

The Role of Conflict Monitoring in Race-Bias Control
Amodio et al. (2004) identified the conflict-monitoring process
as an important mechanism for regulating racial responses. Participants in their study completed a sequential priming task designed
to assess stereotypic associations, called the weapons identification
task (Payne, 2001), while EEG was collected. On each trial of the
weapons identification task, a Black or a White face prime was
presented briefly, followed by a target picture of either a handgun
or a hand tool. Participants’ task was to quickly categorize targets
as a gun or tool within a 500-ms response deadline. As in past
research involving this task, Black face primes facilitated responses to guns and interfered with responses to tools, suggesting
the automatic activation of the violence-related African American
stereotype (Lambert et al., 2003; Payne, 2001; Payne, Lambert, &
Jacoby, 2002). Given the prepotent tendency to choose “gun”
following a Black face, enhanced response control was needed to
override this tendency when the target was a tool. To examine the
role of conflict monitoring in behavioral control, we computed
independent estimates of automatic and controlled processing using the process-dissociation (PD) procedure (Payne, 2001; Jacoby,
1991) and compared these behavioral indices with ERNs associated with responses on high-stereotype-conflict (e.g., Black–tool)
versus low-stereotype-conflict (Black– gun) trials. Results showed
that ERNs were larger on Black–tool trials, in which stereotype
inhibition was required, compared with Black– gun trials, in which
the correct response was congruent with the stereotype (and thus,
inhibition was not needed). In addition, greater sensitivity of the
conflict-monitoring system to race-bias conflict, as indicated by
larger ERNs on Black–tool trials, was correlated with higher PD
estimates of control but was unrelated to PD estimates of automatic stereotyping (see also Amodio, Kubota, Harmon-Jones, &
Devine, 2006). For the present purposes, Amodio et al. (2004,
2006) established a paradigm for examining the conflictmonitoring process in the context of intergroup bias. Here, we
applied this paradigm to test our hypothesis that differences in
regulatory ability among low-prejudice people are due to differences in the ability of neural systems to detect race-biased conflict.

Study 1
We examined ERNs associated with stereotype-response control
among low-prejudice participants characterized by high internal motivation (but low external motivation) versus those with a combination
of high internal and high external motivation, as well as highprejudice participants characterized by low internal motivation. To
create groups that were highly representative of these profiles, we
recruited participants with IMS and EMS scores in the upper or lower
thirds of the participant pool (Alloy, Abramson, Raniere, & Dyller,
1999; Amodio et al., 2003). The extreme-groups approach was critical

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

ROLE OF CONFLICT MONITORING IN INTERGROUP BIAS

for obtaining a true low-IMS group, because IMS scores were highly
positively skewed in this sample. In addition, we combined low-IMS
participants who reported either high or low levels of EMS, because
their responses, which were to be made in private (i.e., without
external pressures), were not theorized to differ (Amodio et al., 2003;
Devine et al., 2002; Plant & Devine, 1998). We predicted that highIMS/low-EMS and high-IMS/high-EMS participants would report
similar pro-Black attitudes, yet high-IMS/low-EMS participants
would exhibit greater response control on the weapons-identification
task relative to high-IMS/high-EMS participants. Furthermore, we
predicted that this difference would be explained by the degree of
conflict-monitoring activity during responses in which automatic stereotypes conflicted with intentions. We expected to observe relatively
low activity of the conflict-monitoring process among high-IMS/highEMS participants when automatic stereotypes are activated, because
their egalitarian intentions are not believed to be represented at the
same automatic level of processing and thus would not create conflict.
Last, low-IMS participants were expected to show a low degree of
response control, coupled with low engagement of conflictmonitoring processes on stereotype-related trials. A low degree of
conflict was expected because stereotypic responses are consistent
with their prejudiced beliefs.
To conduct a strong test of our hypothesis, it was important to
use a task that would elicit similar levels of automatic race-biased
tendencies across groups. Our past work showed that high-IMS/
low-EMS participants exhibited lower levels of implicit bias than
other groups on measures assessing affective/evaluative forms of
bias (Amodio et al., 2003; Devine et al., 2002). However, highIMS/low-EMS participants did not differ from other participants
when implicit stereotype associations were measured (Amodio,
Stahlhut, & Devine, 2002). This distinction is consistent with
research suggesting that implicit stereotyping reflects different
underlying neurocognitive mechanisms than do affect-driven
forms of implicit bias (Amodio & Devine, 2006). Because the
weapons identification task elicits response biases that are driven
primarily by stereotype associations rather than by affective responses, it was particularly well-suited for testing our hypothesis
(Judd, Blair, & Champleau, 2004). In addition, we chose to focus
on PD estimates of automaticity and control as our primary behavioral outcomes. Although reaction times and error rates have
been used to indicate automatic and controlled response patterns in
much past work, it is likely that any given response involves some
combination of automatic and controlled processes, and thus raw
measures of reaction time and accuracy do not provide processpure indicators of automaticity and control (Jacoby, 1991). The
validity of the PD procedure in the context of prejudice has been
established in several published articles (e.g., Amodio et al., 2004;
Judd et al., 2004; Payne et al., 2002; Lambert et al., 2003), and the
assumption of independent processes for automaticity and control
is consistent with research identifying their separate neural substrates (e.g., Amodio et al., 2004, 2006; Cunningham et al., 2004).

Method
Participants
Seventy-three psychology students at the University of Wisconsin—Madison participated individually in exchange for extra
course credit. We selected right-handed female participants to

63

control for variability in physiological responses associated with
sex and handedness (Heller & Levy, 1981). Participants were
White Americans, except for one Asian American.

Procedure
After they provided consent, participants were prepared for
physiological recording and were given instructions for the weapons identification task. They were told that certain responses (i.e.,
errors on Black–tool trials) would reveal race bias but that their
responses would be private and confidential. These instructions
were designed to activate any internal motivations to respond
without prejudice while minimizing concerns over external pressures to appear nonprejudiced (as in Amodio et al., 2004). After
completing the task, participants received a funneled debriefing
and were thanked, awarded extra credit, and dismissed. Sessions
took approximately 2.5 hr.

Materials
IMS and EMS. Participants completed Plant and Devine’s
(1998) IMS (␣ ⫽ .84) and EMS (␣ ⫽ .89) confidentially in a
previous mass testing session. Responses ranged from 1 (strongly
disagree) to 9 (strongly agree). The IMS includes items such as “I
attempt to act in nonprejudiced ways toward Black people because
it is personally important to me.” The EMS includes items such as
“I attempt to appear nonprejudiced toward Black people in order to
avoid disapproval from others.” Plant and Devine (1998) found
scores on the IMS and EMS to be independent across seven
samples (average r ⫽ ⫺.14), and therefore, individuals with similar degrees of internal motivation can vary in their external
motivations (Amodio et al., 2003; Devine et al, 2002; Plant &
Devine, 1998; Plant, Devine, & Brazy, 2003).
Attitude Towards Blacks (ATB) scale. Participants completed
the ATB scale (␣ ⫽ .87) in the same mass testing session. The
ATB scale (Brigham, 1993) assesses positivity of attitudes toward
Black people, scored on a 1–7 scale on which higher scores
indicate more positive attitudes.
Weapons identification task. The stimuli and instructions were
taken from Amodio et al. (2004; originally adapted from Payne,
2001). Stimuli included pictures of two Black and two White male
faces, four handguns, and four hand tools (drill, ratchet, wrench,
pliers), digitized at 228 ⫻ 172 pixels. Stimuli were presented sequentially in the center of the computer screen, and trial order was
randomized. Each trial began with a cross-hatched pattern mask (1 s),
followed by the prime (Black or White face; 200 ms), the target (gun
or tool; 200 ms), and then a second pattern mask (see Figure 1).
Participants were instructed to classify targets as guns or tools as
quickly and accurately as possible using buttons labeled “gun” and
“tool.” The second mask remained onscreen until the participant
responded or until 2 s had elapsed. Participants received a warning to
respond more quickly following responses exceeding 500 ms. Reaction times for all responses were recorded, even when they exceeded
the deadline. Intertrial intervals ranged from 2.5 s to 4 s. Participants
were seated 4 feet (1.22 m) from a 19-in. (48.26-cm) CRT monitor
refreshing at 100 Hz. Stimuli and physiological recording triggers
were presented with DMDX (Forster & Forster, 2003).
Participants completed 16 practice trials in which targets (gun or
tool pictures) were presented one at a time and remained until the

AMODIO, DEVINE, AND HARMON-JONES

64

A
Pattern
Mask

Black or White
Face Prime

Gun or Tool
Target

200 ms

200 ms

Pattern
Mask

Time
1s

response

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

B

Figure 1. Schematic of weapons identification task, which we adapted from Payne (2001), illustrating the
timecourse of events (A) and sample stimuli (B).

participant categorized them correctly, followed by 10 practice
trials in which the targets were preceded by face primes. Participants then completed 288 experimental trials, receiving a 2-min
break after 144 trials. Accuracy feedback was given on practice
trials but not on experimental trials.

Behavioral-Data Processing
Correct response latencies occurring between 250 ms and 1,500 ms
were natural-log transformed and averaged within trial type for analysis (mean latencies are presented in raw ms). Because responsedeadline feedback was displayed only after a response was made,
response-latency data were not contaminated by the presentation of
the warning message. We therefore included response latencies exceeding 500 ms in our analyses to avoid a restricted range of data
known to attenuate response-latency effects (Amodio et al., 2004,
2006; Payne, 2001). Error rates were computed by dividing the
number of errors by the total number of trials within each trial type.
The PD estimate of control was computed by subtracting participants’ error rates on Black–tool trials from their accuracy rates
on Black– gun trials (see Payne, 2001). The PD estimate of automaticity was computed by dividing participants’ error rates on
Black–tool trials by the reciprocal of their control-estimate scores.

EEG Recording and Processing
EEG was recorded from 27 tin electrodes embedded in a stretchlycra cap (ElectroCap; Eaton, OH), which we positioned according
to the 10-10 system using known anatomical landmarks. We
referenced scalp electrodes online to the left earlobe (referenced to
average earlobes offline), with a forehead ground, using ElectroGel (Eaton, OH) as the conducting medium. All impedances were

below 5 k⍀. Vertical and horizontal eye movements were recorded
to facilitate artifact scoring of the EEG. Signals were amplified
with Neuroscan Synamps (Sterling, VA) with a direct-current
coupling, low-pass filtered at 100 Hz, digitized at 2,500 Hz, and
stored to a computer hard drive.
Offline, EEG was scored for movement artifact, submitted to a
regression-based blink-correction procedure (Semlitsch, Anderer,
Schuster, & Presslich, 1986), and then submitted to a 1–15 Hz
bandpass filter (96 dB, zero-phase shift). To quantify ERN amplitudes, we selected an 800-ms response-locked epoch of EEG
signal for each artifact-free trial associated with a valid reaction
time (250 –1500 ms), to exclude ERNs associated with impulsive
errors or inattentiveness. Baseline correction procedures subtracted
the average voltage occurring from 400 –50 ms preresponse from
each entire epoch. Waveforms derived from correct and incorrect
trials were then averaged within their respective trial types. On the
basis of past work and visual inspection of waveforms, ERN
amplitudes were scored as the peak negative deflection occurring
between ⫺50 ms and 150 ms at the frontocentral site (Fcz).

Results
To ensure reliable ERN indices, it was necessary to exclude
cases with fewer than five valid error responses on a given trial
type. Of the original 73 participants, 21 were excluded because
they made fewer than five errors on at least one of the four trial
types (6 high-IMS/low-EMS, 9 high-IMS/high-EMS, and 10 lowIMS participants). Additional participants were excluded because
of excessive EEG artifact (5) or extreme scores on one or more
variables (2) that exceeded three standard deviations. These exclusions yielded 45 participants with full sets of valid responses

ROLE OF CONFLICT MONITORING IN INTERGROUP BIAS

65

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

(12 high-IMS/low-EMS, 17 high-IMS/high-EMS, and 16 low-IMS
participants). For this sample, ERNs were composed of the following average epochs per trial type: 18.80 (Black–tool), 12.71
(Black– gun), 14.64 (White–tool), and 18.38 (White– gun). Mean
IMS, EMS, and ATB scores for each regulatory group are presented in Table 1. Scores on the IMS and EMS were not significantly correlated, r(43) ⫽ .14, p ⫽ .36, consistent with past
findings. ATB scores were correlated with IMS scores, r(41) ⫽
.64, p ⬍ .001, but were not significantly correlated with EMS
scores, r(41) ⫽ ⫺.26, p ⫽ .11. Preliminary analyses showed that
excluded participants did not differ from included participants on
primary behavioral measures, Fs ⬍ 1.

Weapons Identification Task Performance
Preliminary analyses were conducted to establish that the weapons
identification task was successful in eliciting a stereotype-driven
pattern of responding, which in turn created the need for response
control on high-conflict trials (Black–tool) but not on low-conflict
trials (Black–gun). A 2 (Prime: Black vs. White) ⫻ 2 (Target: gun vs.
tool) analysis of variance (ANOVA) on response latencies produced
the expected interaction, F(1, 44) ⫽ 20.92, p ⬍ .001. It indicated that
Black faces facilitated responses to guns but interfered with responses
to tools, compared with White faces (see Figure 2A). A 2 (Prime) ⫻
2 (Target) ANOVA of error rates also produced the expected interaction, F(1, 44) ⫽ 20.64, p ⬍ .001. It indicated that participants had
more difficulty responding to tools than guns when preceded by a
Black face, compared with White prime trials (see Figure 2B). Together, these analyses showed that the task created race-biased response conflict on Black–tool trials and thus a need for greater control
on such trials, compared with Black– gun trials, replicating previous
research (e.g., Amodio et al., 2004, 2006; Payne, 2001, 2005).

Hypothesis Testing Strategy
To establish support for our primary hypothesis that regulatoryability differences among low-prejudice people are due to conflictmonitoring effects, we tested a specific set of predictions. All
statistical tests were two-tailed.
Prediction 1. High-IMS/low-EMS and high-IMS/high-EMS
participants should not differ in explicit prejudice (i.e., ATB

Table 1
Mean Scores on the IMS, EMS, and ATB as a Function of
Group for Study 1
Low IMS
Measure
IMS
EMS
ATB

High IMS/high
EMS

High IMS/low
EMS

M

SD

M

SD

M

SD

8.85a
2.70a
6.19a

0.17
1.06
0.50

8.89a
7.01b
5.88a

0.16
0.93
0.51

6.01b
4.76c
5.22b

1.62
2.46
1.14

Note. The low-IMS group includes participants reporting high and low
levels of external motivation to respond without prejudice. Differing subscripts indicate significantly different means within rows ( p ⬍ .05), as
determined by groupwise t tests. IMS ⫽ Internal Motivation Scale; EMS ⫽
External Motivation Scale; ATB ⫽ Attitude Towards Blacks scale.

Figure 2. Behavioral results from the weapons identification task, including raw response latencies (A) and error rates (B) by trial type.

scores). Both groups should report more positive attitudes toward
Blacks than low-IMS participants.
Prediction 2. All groups are expected to show a similar degree
of automatic stereotype activation, as revealed by stronger PDautomatic estimates associated with Black than with White faces
on the weapons identification task.
Prediction 3. High-IMS/low-EMS participants should demonstrate higher levels of control than high-IMS/high-EMS participants, and both groups should show greater control than low-IMS
participants, as revealed by PD-control estimates associated with
both Black and White faces.
Prediction 4. Compared with high-IMS/high-EMS and lowIMS participants, high-IMS/low-EMS participants should exhibit
greater conflict-monitoring-related brain activity (i.e., ERNs) on
trials requiring stereotype inhibition (e.g., Black–tool trials). No
group differences are expected when responses do not require
inhibition (i.e., Black– gun trials).
Prediction 5. Across participants, ERN scores should be associated with greater behavioral control, as indicated by PDcontrol scores. ERNs should not relate to automatic stereotyping
(i.e., PD-automatic scores).
Prediction 6. Group differences in PD-control should be mediated by conflict-related ERN amplitudes (i.e., from Black–tool trials).

Prediction 1: Explicit Prejudice
A one-way ANOVA indicated differences among regulator
groups’ ATB scores, F(2, 42) ⫽ 4.90, p ⫽ .01. High-IMS/lowEMS and high-IMS/high-EMS participants both reported more
positive attitudes toward Black people than did low-IMS partici-

AMODIO, DEVINE, AND HARMON-JONES

66

pants (see Table 1). It is important to note that ATB scores did not
differ between high-IMS/low-EMS and high-IMS/high-EMS participants, replicating past work and directly supporting Prediction 1.

Table 3
Correlations Between ERN Amplitudes and Indexes of Control
and Automaticity for Study 1
Variable

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Prediction 2: Automatic Race Bias
PD-automatic estimates associated with Black and White faces
were submitted to a 3 (Group: high IMS/low EMS vs. high IMS/high
EMS vs. low IMS) ⫻ 2 (Prime Race: White vs. Black) mixedfactorial ANOVA. A significant effect for prime race emerged, F(1,
42) ⫽ 19.19, p ⬍ .001, indicating greater automatic stereotyping bias
for Black faces than for White faces (see Table 2). Significant effects
were not obtained for group, F(2, 42) ⫽ 1.60, p ⫽ .21, or for the
interaction, F ⬍ 1. PD-automatic estimates for Black and White faces
were not significantly correlated (see Table 3). This pattern of results
revealed that automatic race biases were activated at similar levels
across groups, supporting Prediction 2 and replicating past work.
Given the positive attitudes toward Black people reported by highIMS/low-EMS and high-IMS/high-EMS participants, these results
revealed an inherent conflict between their consciously held beliefs
and their automatic tendencies.

Prediction 3: Race-Bias Control
The hallmark of successful control is intention-driven behavior
that is not affected by extraneous countervailing influences (Baddeley, 1986; Shallice, 1982). In the context of the weapons identification task, control should be evident in accurate classification
of targets, despite the presence of automatic stereotyping associated with Black faces (e.g., Amodio et al., 2004; Lambert et al.,
2003; Payne, 2001, 2005; Payne et al., 2002). In contrast to the
stimulus-driven automatic responses to Black and White faces,
which yielded uncorrelated PD-automatic estimates, PD control
for both Black- and White-face trials reflects the engagement of an
accuracy goal in the task. Because the accuracy goal applies across
Black- and White-face trials, the two PD-control estimates should
be strongly associated (Amodio et al., 2004, 2006; Payne, 2005).
Indeed, these estimates were highly correlated (see Table 3).
To test Prediction 3, PD-control scores were submitted to a 3
(Group) ⫻ 2 (Prime Race) mixed-factorial ANOVA. A significant
effect for group emerged, F(2, 42) ⫽ 15.09, p ⬍ .001. Neither

Table 2
Process Dissociation (PD) Indexes of Automatic and Controlled
Response Processes as a Function of IMS/EMS Group for Study 1

Process estimate
PD automatic
Black
White
PD control
Black
White

High IMS/
low EMS

High IMS/
high EMS

Low IMS

M

SD

M

SD

M

SD

.58a
.42a

.10
.13

.56a
.44a

.12
.17

.64a
.48a

.15
.14

.64a
.62a

.13
.14

.52b
.49b

.17
.14

.32c
.32c

.17
.18

Note. PD estimates are probability scores. Differing subscripts indicate
significantly different means within rows ( p ⬍ .05), as determined by
groupwise t tests.

1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.

Black-tool ERN
Black-gun ERN
PD (C) Black
PD (C) White
PD (A) Black
PD (A) White
Posterror accuracy

1
—
.49*
⫺.61**
⫺.58**
.21
.10
⫺.64**

2

3

4

—
⫺.43*
—
⫺.45* .87**
—
.15 ⫺.26 ⫺.29
⫺.18 ⫺.17 ⫺.03
⫺.46* .89** .90**

5

6

—
⫺.22
⫺.29

—
⫺.07

Note. N ⫽ 45. Larger error-related negativity (ERN) waves are represented by larger negative values. PD refers to process dissociation estimates of automatic (A) and controlled (C) processing for responses associated with Black and White faces. PD scores represent probability
estimates, ranging from 0 to 1.
*
p ⬍ .01. ** p ⬍ .001.

effects for prime race or the interaction reached significance, Fs ⬍
1. Simple analyses confirmed that PD-control scores for high-IMS/
low-EMS participants were significantly larger than those of highIMS/high-EMS participants, who exhibited greater control than
did low-IMS participants (see Table 2). These analyses supported
Prediction 3. Given that PD-control scores for Black and White
trials were collinear (see Table 3) and appeared to reflect a common goal of response accuracy irrespective of race, they were
averaged together to form a single index of control for subsequent
analyses (Tabachnick & Fidell, 2001).

Prediction 4: Group Differences in Race-Bias Conflict
Monitoring
Neural signals for conflict-monitoring processes were indexed
by ERN amplitudes. ERN amplitudes were submitted to a 3
(Group: high IMS/low EMS vs. high IMS/high EMS vs. low
IMS) ⫻ 2 (Prime Race: Black vs. White) ⫻ 2 (Target: gun vs.
tool) ⫻ 2 (Accuracy: correct vs. incorrect) mixed-factorial
ANOVA. This analysis produced a significant four-way interaction, F(2, 42) ⫽ 3.02, p ⫽ .05. Because our predictions pertained
specifically to responses to Black targets, we examined lowerorder effects separately for Black and White faces.
A 3 (Group) ⫻ 2 (Target) ⫻ 2 (Accuracy) ANOVA for trials
involving Black faces produced a main effect for accuracy, F(1,
42) ⫽ 171.66, p ⬍ .001, indicating that ERNs were larger (i.e.,
more negative) when responses were incorrect (M ⫽ ⫺9.69, SD ⫽
4.28) than when they were correct (M ⫽ ⫺1.69, SD ⫽ 2.43). This
effect was qualified by a significant three-way interaction, F(2,
42) ⫽ 3.70, p ⬍ .04 (see Figure 3A). To understand this interaction, we analyzed ERNs associated with correct versus incorrect
responses separately. The analysis of correct responses did not
produce significant effects, Fs ⬍ 1.35, ps ⬎ .25. However, for
incorrect responses, the predicted Group ⫻ Target interaction was
significant, F(2, 42) ⫽ 4.86, p ⬍ .02. Simple-effect analyses
revealed a group effect for Black–tool trial ERNs, F(2, 42) ⫽ 6.64,
p ⬍ .005), but not for Black– gun trials, F ⬍ 1. Black–tool ERNs
were larger among high-IMS/low-EMS participants (M ⫽ ⫺14.15,
SD ⫽ 4.31) than high-IMS/high-EMS participants (M ⫽ ⫺9.48,
SD ⫽ 3.36), F(1, 42) ⫽ 10.76, p ⬍ .005, and low-IMS participants

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

ROLE OF CONFLICT MONITORING IN INTERGROUP BIAS

67

Figure 3. Response-locked waveforms depicting the error-related negativity (ERN) component associated with
Black-prime (A) and White-prime trials (B), as a function of internal motivation scale/external motivation scale
(IMS/EMS) group, target, and accuracy. Larger ERN effects are reflected by larger negative-polarity values.
Zero represents the time of key-press response.

(M ⫽ ⫺8.65, SD ⫽ 4.83), F(1, 42) ⫽ 9.75, p ⬍ .005. Additional
analyses revealed a significant difference between Black–tool and
Black– gun ERNs for high-IMS/low-EMS participants, F(1, 42) ⫽
9.99, p ⬍ .005, but not for either of the other groups, Fs ⬍ 1. Hence,
only high-IMS/low-EMS participants exhibited enhanced ERNs
when automatic stereotyping tendencies were inconsistent with their
intended responses. This pattern of results supported Prediction 4.1
We next examined ERN responses to White faces. However, it is
important to note that White people are not associated with either guns
or tools. This is reflected by the lack of reaction time differences on
White–gun and White–tool trials. Given the reaction-time results, the
differential error rates found for White– gun versus White–tool trials
appear to be artifacts of the gun (vs. tool) associations with Black
faces. Thus, it is not clear how to interpret error-related ERP effects
for White-face trials. With these interpretational ambiguities in mind,
we examined ERN amplitudes on trials involving White faces (see
Figure 3B). A 3 (Group) ⫻ 2 (Target) ⫻ 2 (Accuracy) mixed-factorial
ANOVA produced a main effect for accuracy, F(2, 42) ⫽ 202.33, p ⬍
.001, indicating larger negative amplitudes on error trials (M ⫽
⫺9.42, SD ⫽ 4.40) than on correct trials (M ⫽ ⫺1.51, SD ⫽ 2.48).
This effect was qualified by a Group ⫻ Accuracy interaction, F(2,
42) ⫽ 4.61, p ⬍ .02. Simple-effect analyses suggested that the
groups’ ERN amplitudes differed on incorrect trials only, F(2, 42) ⫽
7.01, p ⬍ .005, such that ERNs were larger for high-IMS/low-EMS
participants (M ⫽ ⫺12.35, SD ⫽ 3.91) than for high-IMS/high-EMS
participants (M ⫽ ⫺9.08, SD ⫽ 2.69), F(1, 42) ⫽ 6.79, p ⬍ .02, and
low-IMS participants, (M ⫽ ⫺7.60, SD ⫽ 3.34), F(1, 42) ⫽ 11.56,
p ⬍ .005. The ERN amplitudes of high-IMS/high-EMS participants
did not differ significantly from those of low-IMS participants, F(1,
42) ⫽ 1.99, p ⫽ .17. These effects were not moderated by target (i.e.,
guns vs. tools), however, and therefore could not be interpreted as
evidencing conflict monitoring related to stereotyping. Additional
analyses compared ERNs on critical Black–tool trials with ERNs of
the other trial types. These analyses revealed a significant difference

among high-IMS/low-EMS participants, F(1, 42) ⫽ 9.61, p ⬍ .005,
but not among the other groups, Fs ⬍ 1.03.
This set of analyses showed that conflict-monitoring processing
is more strongly engaged in response to race-biased tendencies

1
Recently, the correct-related negativity (CRN) component of the ERP has
been used to measure conflict-monitoring processes that lead to successful
response control (i.e., correct responses on high-conflict trials; e.g., Bartholow
et al., 2005; see also N2correct; Yeung et al., 2004). The CRN is a negativepolarity waveform that is strongest at frontocentral midline scalp sites and, like
the ERN, has been associated with an ACC neural generator (van Veen &
Carter, 2002). CRN effects tend to be more subtle than those of ERNs and thus
do not provide as strong of an indicator of conflict monitoring, but we include
analyses of the response-locked CRN as a supplement.
The CRN has been examined as both a response-locked and stimulus-locked
component. Here, CRN amplitudes were scored as the peak negative deflection occurring 75–150 ms prior to correct responses and were submitted to a
3 (Group: high IMS/low EMS vs. high IMS/high EMS vs. low IMS) ⫻ 2
(Prime: Black vs. White) ⫻ 2 (Target: gun vs. tool) ANOVA. A significant
Prime ⫻ Target interaction, F(1, 42) ⫽ 13.75, p ⬍ .001, indicated larger CRN
amplitudes for Black–tool trials than for each of the other trial types, ts(44) ⬎
2.42, ps ⬍ .02, replicating Amodio et al. (2004). This effect was not moderated
by group. However, planned comparisons following from ERN analyses
indicated that the CRN enhancement on Black–tool trials, relative to Black–
gun trials, was significant for high-IMS/low-EMS participants (Ms ⫽ ⫺5.90
and ⫺3.20, respectively), F(1, 42) ⫽ 7.74, p ⬍ .01, and high-IMS/high-EMS
participants (Ms ⫽ ⫺5.75 and ⫺3.47, respectively), F(1, 42) ⫽ 12.32, p ⬍ .01,
but not for low-IMS participants (Ms ⫽ ⫺5.12 and ⫺3.84, respectively), F(1,
42) ⫽ 2.42, p ⫽ .13. Finally, Black–tool CRN amplitudes were associated with
accuracy on tool trials, r(43) ⫽ ⫺.33, p ⬍ .03, and PD control, r(43) ⫽ ⫺.33,
p ⬍ .03, in partial correlations covarying Black– gun CRN amplitudes. These
results suggest that when highly internally motivated individuals (irrespective
of external motivation) succeed in overriding stereotyping effects, their success
may be attributed to effective conflict-monitoring activity.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

68

AMODIO, DEVINE, AND HARMON-JONES

Figure 4. Mediation model illustrating how the difference between high-IMS/low-EMS and high-IMS/highEMS participants’ response accuracy on trials requiring the inhibition of automatic stereotyping (Black–tool
trials) was accounted for by error-related negativity (ERN) amplitudes on Black–tool trials. Betas are reported
(beta in parentheses represents the effect of group on response accuracy before ERN scores were included in the
regression model). Larger ERNs are represented by more negative values. *p ⬍ .05. **p ⬍ .01.

among high-IMS/low-EMS participants than among high-IMS/
high-EMS and low-IMS participants, supporting Prediction 4.

monitoring activity was tightly linked to enhanced behavioral
control across groups.

Prediction 5: Relationship Between Race-Bias ERNs and
Behavior

Prediction 6: Mediation Analyses

Correlational analyses revealed that larger ERN amplitudes
were significantly associated with greater PD control, as well as
posterror accuracy, an additional behavioral indicator of control
used in past work (Rabbit, 1966; see Table 3). Black– gun ERN
amplitudes were covaried from Black–tool ERN amplitudes so that
partial correlations could be examined. These analyses indicated
that Black–tool ERN amplitudes predicted higher PD-control
scores, r(42) ⫽ ⫺.51, p ⬍ .001, and greater posterror accuracy,
r(42) ⫽ ⫺.54, p ⬍ .001, beyond any effect of Black– gun ERNs.
Black–tool ERNs were not correlated with the PD-automatic estimates for Black or White faces.
Additional analyses indicated that greater control across trials
was predicted uniquely by ERNs associated with Black faces but
not with White faces. After partialling the ERN amplitude from
White–tool trials, larger Black–tool ERNs predicted greater PDcontrol estimates for both Black and White faces, rs ⬎ .42, ps ⬍
.005. By contrast, after partialling Black–tool ERNs, White–tool
ERNs were not significantly associated with PD-control estimates
for Black or White faces, rs ⬍ .21, ps ⬎ .18. These results
demonstrated that conflict-monitoring signals were activated specifically in response to the need for stereotype inhibition (i.e., on
Black–tool trials) and subsequently engaged a control mechanism
that enhanced response regulation across trials, supporting Prediction 5.
Next, using regression with dummy codes, as recommended for
the analysis of categorical group data (Cohen, Cohen, West, &
Aiken, 2003), we examined whether the relationship between ERN
amplitude and response control varied as a function of group.
These analyses revealed that the association of ERN amplitudes
and PD control did not differ significantly between high-IMS/lowEMS and high-IMS/high-EMS participants, B ⫽ ⫺0.09, t(39) ⫽
⫺1.45, p ⫽ .16, high-IMS/low-EMS and low-IMS participants,
B ⫽ ⫺0.08, t(39) ⫽ ⫺1.49, p ⫽ .15, or high-IMS/high-EMS and
low-IMS participants, B ⫽ .01, t(39) ⫽ 0.18, p ⫽ .87. These
findings suggest that, although the absolute level of activity of the
conflict-monitoring system differed by group, greater conflict-

Our central hypothesis was that the conflict-monitoring process
explains individual differences in regulatory ability among lowprejudice people. This hypothesis was directly tested with a mediation analysis. As an initial test of mediation, we created a group
contrast whereby high-IMS/low-EMS participants were assigned a
value of 1, and the other two groups were each assigned a value of
⫺.5. Mediation was assessed by testing four regression models
(Baron & Kenny, 1986). These revealed that (a) the group contrast
predicted Black–tool ERN amplitude, ␤ ⫽ .48, t(43) ⫽ 3.63, p ⬍
.001 (see Prediction 4), (b) the group contrast predicted PD control, ␤ ⫽ .49, t(43) ⫽ 3.69, p ⬍ .001, and (c) Black–tool ERN
amplitude predicted accuracy on PD control, ␤ ⫽ ⫺.59, t(43) ⫽
4.73, p ⬍ .001. When ERN amplitude was included as a covariate,
the group contrast was reduced to marginal significance, ␤ ⫽ .25,
t(42) ⫽ 1.88, p ⫽ .07; Sobel’s z ⫽ 2.45, p ⬍ .04.
To more directly test our main hypothesis regarding high-IMS/
low-EMS participants versus high-IMS/high-EMS participants, we
created a group contrast comparing these groups (coded 1 vs. ⫺1,
respectively). Regression analyses indicated that (a) the contrast
predicted Black–tool ERN amplitudes, ␤ ⫽ ⫺.53, t(27) ⫽ ⫺3.28,
p ⬍ .005 (see Prediction 4 results), (b) the contrast predicted PD
control, ␤ ⫽ .40, t(27) ⫽ 2.29, p ⬍ .02, and (c) Black–tool ERN
amplitude predicted PD control, ␤ ⫽ ⫺.53, t(26) ⫽ ⫺3.24, p ⬍
.005. A final regression supported the mediation hypothesis, such
that this contrast variable no longer predicted PD control when
race-bias ERN amplitudes were covaried, ␤ ⫽ .17, t(26) ⫽ 0.87,
p ⫽ .39, Sobel’s z ⫽ 1.79, p ⫽ .07 (see Figure 4). However, the
contrast effect on PD control was not mediated by ERNs from
Black– gun trials, Sobel’s z ⫽ .37, p ⫽ .71. These results supported
our main hypothesis that the conflict-monitoring processes could
explain differences in prejudice control between high-IMS/lowEMS and high-IMS/high-EMS participants.

Discussion
In Study 1, we tested a specific set of hypotheses to determine
whether conflict-monitoring process might account for why some

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

ROLE OF CONFLICT MONITORING IN INTERGROUP BIAS

low-prejudice people are more effective at regulating intergroup
responses than others (e.g., Amodio et al., 2003; Devine et al.,
2002). As in past work, we found that high-IMS/low-EMS and
high-IMS/high-EMS participants reported positive explicit attitudes toward Black people while also exhibiting automatic stereotyping effects. Despite an equivalent discrepancy between automatic and intentional responses, high-IMS/low-EMS participants
exhibited significantly greater control over stereotype-driven tendencies on the weapons identification task than did high-IMS/
high-EMS participants. Measures of neural activity revealed that
these differences in control were due to differential conflictmonitoring activity. That is, high-IMS/high-EMS participants
were less effective in regulating their behavior because their
conflict-monitoring systems were not engaged in response to unwanted stereotyping tendencies. Low-IMS participants did not
show enhanced conflict monitoring or behavioral control when
responses held the potential for revealing race bias, as was expected given their highly prejudiced attitudes. In addition, although low-IMS participants who reported high versus low EMS
were combined for theoretical reasons, analyses comparing these
two subgroups found no differences on key variables, including
Black–tool ERNs (⫺8.71 vs. ⫺8.60), F ⬍ 1, and PD-control
scores (.37 vs. .28), F(1, 14) ⫽ 1.20, p ⫽ .29. In sum, this study
identified the conflict-monitoring process as a mechanism that
explains variability in low-prejudice people’s ability to effectively
regulate race-biased behavior.
Our interpretation of the ERN as representing a conflictmonitoring function is in line with the predominant view of current
theorists, although alternative interpretations exist. One is that the
ERN represents the conscious detection that an error was made
(e.g., Falkenstein, Hohnsbein, Hoorman, & Blanke, 1991; Gehring
et al., 1993). However, subsequent research has shown that the
ERN is not dependent on awareness (Nieuwenhuis et al. 2001) and
that an ERN-like deflection with a similar ACC substrate is also
seen for correct responses to high-conflict stimuli (see Footnote 1;
also, Bartholow et al., 2005). Furthermore, because high-IMS/lowEMS and high-IMS/high-EMS participants would presumably
both be sensitive to errors, this error-detection interpretation does
not fit our data. Another interpretation of the ERN is that it
represents a feedback signal for surprising events, which functions
to tune learning systems linked to the mesencephalic dopamine
system (Holroyd & Coles, 2002). This feedback interpretation is
complementary to the conflict-monitoring account, and it is possible that both functions characterize individuals with high internal
motivation and low external motivation. Although our research
was not designed to test the feedback account, it would be fruitful
to examine the interplay of these functions in future work.
We were careful in Study 1 to address several alternative
explanations. Our hypothesis was that enhanced conflictmonitoring processes should be triggered specifically on trials
on which automatic biases and intentions were incongruent
(Black–tool trials) but not on trials on which they were congruent (Black– gun trials), and that this effect would be especially evident for individuals with high internal/low external
motivation. On the basis of theories of cognitive control (e.g.,
Baddeley, 1986; Shallice, 1982), we further hypothesized that,
once triggered, this mechanism of control should affect responses across trials (Payne, 2005). Indeed, ERN amplitudes
were uniquely enhanced on Black–tool trials among high-IMS/

69

low-EMS participants but predicted the implementation of response control across all trial types, suggesting a shift toward
an accuracy-based (i.e., individuated) processing style (Fiske &
Neuberg, 1990). Nevertheless, it may still be possible that
patterns of conflict monitoring observed in Study 1 were related
to more general differences in cognitive-control abilities between groups. The strongest test of this alternative hypothesis
would be to examine whether these groups differ in their
performance on a basic cognitive task commonly used to assess
general conflict processing and cognitive control. If the group
differences observed in Study 1 on the weapons identification
task reflect domain-general effects, we would expect to find the
same group differences on a general cognitive-control task. We
tested this possibility in Study 2, in which participants completed the Eriksen flankers task (Eriksen & Eriksen, 1974), a
widely-used behavioral measure of response-conflict processing, in addition to the weapons identification task. The flankers
task was chosen because it is conceptually similar to the weapons identification task in that it requires responses that are
either congruent or incongruent with prepotent response tendencies. Our primary hypothesis focused on the responses of
high-IMS/low-EMS versus those of high-IMS/high-EMS participants, such that they were expected to differ in controlled
processing on the weapons identification task, as in Study 1, but
not on the flankers task.

Study 2
Method
Participants
Fifty-nine introductory-psychology students at New York University volunteered to participate in exchange for course credit.
Participants were selected on the basis of their IMS and EMS
scores to match those of good regulators, poor regulators, and
nonregulators in Study 1.

Procedure
After providing consent, participants completed the weapons
identification task and then the flankers task on a computer. Next,
participants completed the IMS/EMS scale and then questionnaires
unrelated to this study. One to five participants took part in a given
session, and all measures were completed privately at separate
computer workstations. Upon completing the study, participants
were debriefed, awarded extra credit, thanked, and dismissed.

Behavioral Tasks
The weapons identification task was identical to that used in
Study 1, except that it included 196 trials. Fewer trials were
required without the constraints of the ERN assessment. PD estimates of automaticity and control were computed as in Study 1.
The Eriksen flankers task is commonly used to measure the
ability to regulate responses in the midst of competing prepotent
response tendencies. On a given trial, a row of five arrows is
presented, and the participant’s task is to press a button indicating
whether the center arrow points left (⬍⬍⬍⬍⬍) or right
(⬎⬎⬎⬎⬎) while ignoring the outer arrows (i.e., the “flankers”).

AMODIO, DEVINE, AND HARMON-JONES

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

70

On 60% of the trials (congruent condition), the center arrow
pointed in the same direction as the flankers. On 20% of the trials
(incongruent condition), the center arrow pointed in the opposite
direction (e.g., ⬍⬍⬎⬍⬍ or ⬎⬎⬍⬎⬎). Another 20% of the trials
were designated no-go trials (⬍⬍X⬍⬍ or ⬎⬎X⬎⬎), on which
the participant withholds a response. We included no-go trials to
examine hypotheses unrelated to issues of intergroup bias, and
they are therefore not discussed further (although regulation
groups did not differ in no-go accuracy, F ⬍ 1). The discrepancy
in trial frequencies was designed to entrain a habitual congruentflankers response, so that incongruent trials created response conflict and required control. In this way, the task modeled stereotypedriven effects observed with the weapons identification task. As
with the weapons identification task, participants were instructed
to respond within 500 ms of target presentation. Response latencies and error rates were computed for congruent and incongruent
trials, collapsing across direction of the target arrow. Raw response
latencies were natural-log transformed for analyses. PD estimates
of control and automaticity were computed from error rates on
congruent and incongruent trials, as in Study 1.

Exclusions
Data from one African American participant were excluded because it was not appropriate to examine her IMS/EMS scores. Of the
remaining cases, data were excluded if the participant’s error rate on
incongruent flankers trials was very high (above 85%; 5 cases) or if
scores on one or more measures exceeded three standard deviations (5
cases). Forty-eight participants (57% female, 43% male; 71% White,
25% Asian, 4% Hispanic) survived these criteria, and the distribution
of participants into the three groups was similar to that of Study 1: 16
high-IMS/low-EMS, 15 high-IMS/high-EMS, and 17 low-IMS participants. IMS and EMS scores closely matched those of Study 1 for
good regulators, poor regulators, and nonregulators (MIMS ⫽ 8.39,
8.45, and 4.41, respectively; MEMS ⫽ 3.74, 6.85, and 5.16, respectively). Sex distribution did not differ between IMS/EMS groups,
␹2 ⫽ 2.70, p ⫽ .26.

Results
The main goal of Study 2 was to test whether the group effects
observed on the race-specific weapons identification task would be
found for the domain-general flankers task. In particular, we
wanted to determine whether high-IMS/high-EMS participants’
difficulty in responding without bias reflected a general cognitive
impairment, relative to high-IMS/low-EMS participants. Average
PD-control and PD-automatic estimates for both tasks are presented in Table 4. A preliminary set of analyses examining sex
effects did not produce any significant main effects or interactions
involving sex for any dependent measure, and therefore, all analyses collapsed across this variable.

Regulation Group Effects
We first conducted a 3 (Group: high IMS/low EMS vs. high
IMS/high EMS vs. low IMS) ⫻ 2 (Race Prime: Black vs. White)
ANOVA for PD-automatic estimates to validate that the task
elicited a pattern of automatic stereotyping. Replicating Study 1, a
main effect for race prime emerged, F(1, 45) ⫽ 22.68, p ⬍ .001.

Table 4
Process-Dissociation (PD) Indexes of Automatic and Controlled
Response Processes From the Weapons-Identification and
Flankers Tasks as a Function of IMS/EMS Group for Study 2

Process estimate
Automatic
Weapon/Black
Weapon/White
Flanker
Control
Weapon/Black
Weapon/White
Flanker

High IMS/
low EMS

High IMS/
high EMS

Non-low
IMS

M

SD

M

SD

M

SD

.56a
.44a
.95a

.22
.16
.13

.65a
.43a
.92a

.17
.24
.17

.56a
.36a
.93a

.21
.20
.17

.79a
.73a
.46a

.09
.11
.13

.68b
.65a,b
.52a

.12
.17
.17

.59b
.61b
.40a

.23
.22
.17

Note. PD estimates are probability scores. Differing subscripts indicate
significantly different means within rows ( p ⬍ .05), as determined by
groupwise t tests.

It indicated stronger automatic stereotyping effects for Black faces
(M ⫽ .59, SD ⫽ .20) than White faces (M ⫽ .41, SD ⫽ .20). There
were no effects for group or the interaction, Fs ⬍ 1.
A 3 (Group) ⫻ 2 (Race Prime) ANOVA for PD-control estimates associated with race bias produced a main effect for group,
F(2, 45) ⫽ 4.36, p ⫽ .02, replicating the findings of Study 1. PD
control was significantly higher among high-IMS/low-EMS participants than among high-IMS/high-EMS participants, t(29) ⫽
2.38, p ⫽ .02, and low-IMS participants, t(31) ⫽ 2.79, p ⬍ .01.
PD-control between high-IMS/high-EMS and low-IMS participants did not differ significantly, t(30) ⫽ 1.01, p ⫽ .31. The main
effect for race prime, F(1, 45) ⫽ 2.11, p ⫽ .15, and the interaction,
F(2, 45) ⫽ 1.88, p ⫽ .17, were not significant.

Flankers Effects
We examined response latencies and error rates to establish the
validity of the flankers task. As expected, responses were slower
on incongruent trials (M ⫽ 474 ms) than on congruent trials (M ⫽
354 ms), t(47) ⫽ 21.75, p ⬍ .001. Similarly, higher error rates
were observed for incongruent trials (M ⫽ 51%) than for congruent trials (M ⫽ 3%), t(47) ⫽ 15.63, p ⬍ .001. This pattern
indicated that the flankers task created a domain-general regulatory challenge that permitted appropriate comparison to the racespecific weapons identification task.
One-way ANOVAs examining group effects on PD estimates of
control and automaticity for the flankers task were not significant,
Fs ⬍ 1, indicating no group differences on this general measure of
response control.

Comparison of Weapons Identification and Flankers
Effects
Our primary hypothesis in Study 2 was that high-IMS/highEMS participants’ egalitarian intentions were not internalized sufficiently to create competition with automatic stereotyping tendencies at the level of conflict monitoring, compared with high-IMS/
low-EMS participants; and thus, this effect should be specific to
the domain of intergroup bias. A preliminary omnibus 3 (Group:

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

ROLE OF CONFLICT MONITORING IN INTERGROUP BIAS

high IMS/low EMS vs. high IMS/high EMS vs. low IMS) ⫻ 2
(Task: weapons vs. flankers) ANOVA on PD-control estimates
from the two tasks produced a marginal interaction, F(2, 45) ⫽
2.15, p ⫽ .13. An inspection of simple effects suggested that,
although high-IMS/low-EMS and high-IMS/high-EMS participants differed in their responses on the weapons identification task,
they did not differ in responses on the flankers task (see Table 4).
By comparison, low-IMS participants showed a tendency for lower
control on both tasks, and this tendency likely weakened the
expected interaction effect. Given that our hypotheses pertained
specifically to patterns of control among high-IMS/low-EMS and
high-IMS/high-EMS participants, we conducted a more focused 2
(Group: high IMS/low EMS vs. high IMS/high EMS) ⫻ 2 (Task:
weapons vs. flankers) ANOVA on PD-control estimates. The
critical interaction was significant, F(1, 31) ⫽ 5.14, p ⫽ .03,
providing more direct support for the hypothesis that these two
groups of low-prejudice participants would differ in PD control on
the weapons identification task but not on the flankers task.

Race-Specific Versus Domain-General Components of
Control
Past research has shown that controlled processing in the context of
prejudice involves a combination of general regulatory abilities and
domain-specific abilities (Payne, 2005). Thus, we expected that PD
control from the flankers task and the weapons identification task
should be related and that the degree of relation between scores on
these measures would reflect participants’ general regulatory abilities.
However, the hypothesized IMS/EMS group differences should be
evident in the variance of PD control on the weapons identification
task that is attributable only to the race-specific component of control.
To test this hypothesis, we conducted an analysis of covariance
(ANCOVA) examining regulation-group differences in race-specific
controlled processing while controlling for domain-general aspects of
controlled processing. PD-control scores from the weapons identification task were submitted to a 3 (Group: high IMS/low EMS vs. high
IMS/high EMS vs. low IMS) ⫻ 2 (Race Prime: Black vs. White)
ANCOVA, with PD-control scores from the flankers task included as
the covariate. This analysis produced a significant effect for the
covariate, F(1, 44) ⫽ 12.37, p ⫽ .001, which reflected a significant
degree of overlap in controlled processing on the two tasks that is
attributable to domain-general regulatory ability. However, the group
difference in PD control on the weapons identification task continued
to be significant, F(2, 44) ⫽ 4.53, p ⫽ .02, indicating that the
observed IMS/EMS group differences in the control of race-related
responses were independent of general regulatory abilities.

Discussion
The results of Study 2 showed that although the groups differed in
their degree of response control in the context of race, as in Study 1,
they did not differ on a domain-general measure of response control.
Thus, the individual differences in conflict monitoring observed in
Study 1 likely reflected regulatory abilities specific to nonprejudiced
intentions and the context of race and were not due to more fundamental differences in cognitive abilities.

General Discussion
Theorists have long acknowledged the challenges associated
with regulating race-biased responses. Allport (1954) wrote that

71

“prejudiced attitudes are almost certain to collide with deep-seated
values that are often equally or more central to the personality,”
and as a result, many Americans live in a “state of conflict” (p.
326). Since Allport made this prescient observation, researchers
have accumulated numerous examples of conflict between automatic race biases and consciously held egalitarian beliefs. The
present research is the first to examine the way this conflict plays
out in neural processes over the course of a race-biased response
among different individuals.
Consistent with past research (Amodio et al., 2003; Devine et
al., 2002), we found that high-IMS/low-EMS participants were
more effective regulators of behavior on a stereotype-inhibition
task than were high-IMS/high-EMS participants, despite their
equally low-prejudice attitudes and equivalent baseline levels of
automatic stereotyping. Here, we extended past findings by showing that neural conflict-monitoring processes accounted for the
difference in control between these groups. These findings were
consistent with the hypothesis that individuals with high internal
motivation and high external motivation are less effective in responding without bias because the conflict between automatic
stereotypes and egalitarian intentions is not strongly represented at
the neural level while individuals form their responses.
Although the present findings show strong support for the
hypothesis that differences in conflict monitoring explain why
some egalitarians are worse regulators of bias than others, some
potential limitations are worth considering. Our use of an allfemale sample in Study 1 raises the possibility that our results
would not have been observed for men. However, the behavioral
effects of Study 1 were replicated in Study 2, in which gender
effects were not observed. Furthermore, there are no known gender
effects on ACC processing or on the ERN, and it is therefore
unlikely that the results of Study 1 only pertain to women. A
second potential limitation is that by telling participants that the
weapons identification task could affect their use of stereotypes
(albeit confidentially, to boost motivation to respond accurately),
our results may have been driven by external motivations. This
possibility would predict that high-IMS/high-EMS participants
and a subset of low-IMS participants (those with high EMS) would
have shown a high degree of behavioral control and large ERNs,
but they did not.

Comparing Social Psychological and Neuroscientific
Models of Control
Previous social psychological models have identified bias detection as an important step toward regulating behavior but differ
from the present approach in their explanation for how the detection of bias is accomplished. Most previous models (e.g., Wegener
& Petty, 1997; Wilson & Brekke, 1994) focus on the deliberative
process of detecting the presence of bias and deciding to initiate
control (but see Gollwitzer, 1999). In contrast, the neurocognitive
model proposes that control is elicited when activations in an
associative network come into conflict, requiring neither the conscious awareness of bias nor a homunculus who “just knows”
when control is needed (Botvinick et al., 2001; Miller & Cohen,
2001). This model is consistent with data showing that mechanisms of control are set in motion very early in the response stream
and do not require conscious appraisals (Berns et al., 1997; Nieuwenhuis et al., 2001; see also Moskowitz, Gollwitzer, Wasel, &

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

72

AMODIO, DEVINE, AND HARMON-JONES

Schaal, 1999). By using ERPs to track this process, we were able
to show evidence of conflict-processing before a response was
actually made. In cases where automatic race-biased tendencies
were detected and quickly inhibited during the course of a single
response, conflict processing was observed approximately 100 ms
before a successfully regulated response (see Footnote 1; also
Amodio et al., 2004). These findings show that effective response
control may be deployed without a person’s awareness that a
race-biased response was averted.
Our focus on the conflict-monitoring component of control
complements other research on the regulative component of control that is signaled by conflict-monitoring activity (Kerns et al.,
2004). For example, Bartholow, Dickter, and Sestir (2006) examined the regulative component of control in the context of race bias
using an ERP component called the negative slow wave that is
believed to reflect prefrontal cortical activity. The authors observed higher negative slow-wave amplitudes on trials in which
stereotyping tendencies were successfully inhibited. This research
extended the findings of Amodio et al. (2004) to demonstrate that
control of racial bias involves both conflict-monitoring and regulative aspects of control, associated with the ACC and prefrontal
cortex, respectively. However, researchers have not examined
individual differences in the role of the regulative component of
control in the context of race bias. Although the ERN mediated
behavioral differences between high-IMS/low-EMS and highIMS/high-EMS participants in Study 1, it is possible that a measure of the regulative component might further account for this
group difference.
Our findings also complement research on more “downstream”
aspects of race-bias regulation, such as the thoughts and feelings
experienced after the commission of prejudice and their effects on
future behavior (e.g., Amodio, Devine, & Harmon-Jones, 2007;
Monteith, 1993; Monteith, Ashburn-Nardo, Voils, & Czopp,
2002). For example, Monteith’s (1993) model of prejudice control
was designed to predict patterns of cognitive, affective, and behavioral processes that are elicited when an individual becomes
aware of having made a prejudiced response. More recent work by
Amodio et al. (2007) demonstrated the role of prefrontal cortical
activity in the regulation of behavior following awareness that one
has responded with prejudice. Thus, the present work and the
research of Monteith and colleagues focuses on two different
stages of prejudice control, namely, pre- and postconscious processing. Whereas the present analysis focuses on the rapid processes that function to regulate a potentially race-biased response
as it unfolds, Monteith’s (1993) model focuses primarily on how
people regulate future race-related behavior after a race-biased
response has been committed (see also Amodio et al., 2007).
However, because efforts to regulate future behaviors are typically
more deliberative, our theoretical analysis suggests that individuals
with both high internal/low external and high internal/high external motivational profiles would be effective in implementing this
form of control.

Strategies for Increasing Race-Bias Control
By using ERP measures and applying a neurocognitive model of
control, we provide unique insights into methods of prejudice
reduction. For example, our findings suggest that the regulation of
intergroup responses could be improved by enhancing the sensi-

tivity of the conflict-monitoring system in situations in which bias
may occur. Techniques have previously been shown to reduce the
effect of automatic stereotyping on behavior, although not with the
conflict-monitoring model in mind. For example, Kawakami,
Dovidio, Moll, Hermsen, and Russin (2000) showed that stereotyping effects on behavior could be reduced by training participants to negate stereotypic associations with African Americans
across hundreds of trials. In light of the present findings, we
suggest that Kawakami et al.’s negation training may have amplified the conflict-monitoring process by producing concurrent activation of stereotypic and counterstereotypic responses when participants viewed a Black face, in addition to the authors’
interpretation that the training weakened participants’ automatic
stereotyped associations. Given the present findings that individuals with a profile of high internal motivation and high external
motivation may lack concurrent activation of automatic stereotypic
and counterstereotypic responses, the prejudice-reduction strategies used by Kawakami et al. (2000) would be especially effective
for enhancing conflict-monitoring responses in these individuals.

Conclusion
Understanding the intrapsychic conflict between countervailing
prepotent and intended responses has captured psychologists’ attention for much of the field’s history. In the present research, we
employed a measure of neural activity to assess the role of conflict
monitoring in people’s efforts to respond without race bias toward
Black people. Our results indicate that prejudice control depends
on the sensitivity of the conflict-monitoring system to unwanted
race bias and suggests that a proneness to unintentional expressions of prejudice among some low-prejudice people is due in part
to a deficit in this system.

References
Alloy, L. B., Abramson, L. Y., Raniere, D., & Dyller, I. M. (1999).
Research methods in adult psychopathology. In P. C. Kendall, J. N.
Butcher, & G. N. Holmbeck (Eds.), Handbook of research methods in
clinical psychology (pp. 466 – 498). New York: Wiley.
Allport, G. W. (1954). The nature of prejudice. Reading, MA: AddisonWesley.
Amodio, D. M., & Devine, P. G. (2006). Stereotyping and evaluation in
implicit race bias: Evidence for independent constructs and unique
effects on behavior. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 91,
652– 661.
Amodio, D. M., Devine, P. G., & Harmon-Jones, E. (2007). A dynamic
model of guilt: Implications for motivation and self-regulation in the
context of prejudice. Psychological Science, 18, 524 –530.
Amodio, D. M., Harmon-Jones, E., & Devine, P. G. (2003). Individual
differences in the activation and control of affective race bias as assessed
by startle eyeblink responses and self-report. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 84, 738 –753.
Amodio, D. M., Harmon-Jones, E., Devine, P. G., Curtin, J. J., Hartley,
S. L., & Covert, A. E. (2004). Neural signals for the detection of
unintentional race bias. Psychological Science, 15, 88 –93.
Amodio, D. M., Kubota, J. T., Harmon-Jones, E., & Devine, P. G. (2006).
Alternative mechanisms for regulating racial responses according to
internal vs. external cues. Social Cognitive and Affective Neuroscience,
1, 26 –36.
Amodio, D. M., Stahlhut, C., & Devine, P. G. (2002). Dissociations of
implicit stereotyping and evaluative race bias as a function of internal

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

ROLE OF CONFLICT MONITORING IN INTERGROUP BIAS
and external motivations to respond without prejudice. Unpublished
manuscript, University of Wisconsin.
Baddeley, A. D. (1986). Working memory. New York: Oxford University
Press.
Baron, R. M., & Kenny, D. A. (1986). The moderator–mediator variable
distinction in social psychological research: Conceptual, strategic, and
statistical consideration. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
51, 1173–1182.
Bartholow, B. D., Dickter, C. L., & Sestir, M. A. (2006). Stereotype
activation and control of race bias: Cognitive control of inhibition and its
impairment by alcohol. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
90, 272–287.
Bartholow, B. D., Pearson, M. A., Dickter, C. L., Sher, K. J., Fabiani, M.,
Gratton, G. (2005). Strategic control and medial frontal negativity:
Beyond errors and response conflict. Psychophysiology, 42, 33– 42.
Berns, G. S., Cohen, J. D., & Mintun, M. A. (1997, May 23). Brain regions
responsive to novelty in the absence of awareness. Science, 276, 1272–
1275.
Botvinick, M. M., Braver, T. S., Barch, D. M., Carter, C. S., & Cohen, J. D.
(2001). Conflict monitoring and cognitive control. Psychological Review, 108, 624 – 652.
Botvinick, M. M., Nystrom, L. E., Fissel, K., Carter, C. S., & Cohen, J. D.
(1999, November 11). Conflict monitoring versus selection-for-action in
anterior cingulate cortex. Nature, 402, 179 –181.
Brigham, J. C. (1993). College students’ racial attitudes. Journal of Applied
and Social Psychology, 23, 1933–1967.
Carter, C. S., Braver, T. S., Barch, D. M., Botvinick, M. M., Noll, D., &
Cohen, J. D. (1998, May 1). Anterior cingulate cortex, error detection,
and the online monitoring of performance. Science, 280, 747–749.
Cohen, J., Cohen, P., West, S. G., & Aiken, L. S. (2003). Applied multiple
regression/correlation analysis for the behavioral sciences. Mahwah,
NJ: Erlbaum.
Coles, M. G. H., Gratton, G., & Fabiani, M. (1990). Event-related brain
potentials. In J. T. Cacioppo & L. G. Tassinary (Eds.), Principles of
psychophysiology: Physical, social, and inferential elements (pp. 413–
455). New York: Cambridge University Press.
Crowne, D. P., & Marlowe, D. (1960). A new scale of social desirability
independent of psychopathology. Journal of Consulting Psychology, 24,
349 –354.
Cunningham, W. A., Johnson, M. K., Raye, C. L., Gatenby, J. C., Gore,
J. C., & Banaji, M. R. (2004). Dissociated conscious and unconscious
evaluations of social groups: An fMRI investigation. Psychological
Science, 15, 806 – 813.
Deci, E. L., & Ryan, R. M. (2000). The “what” and “why” of goal pursuits:
Human needs and the self-determination of behavior. Psychological
Inquiry, 11, 227–268.
Dehaene, S., Posner, M. I., & Tucker, D. M. (1994). Localization of a
neural system for error detection and compensation. Psychological Science, 5, 303–305.
Devine, P. G. (1989). Prejudice and stereotypes: Their automatic and
controlled components. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
56, 5–18.
Devine, P. G., & Monteith, M. M. (1999). Automaticity and control in
stereotyping. In S. Chaiken & Y. Trope (Eds.), Dual process theories in
social psychology (pp. 339 –360). New York: Guilford Press.
Devine, P. G., Monteith, M. M., Zuwerink, J. R., & Elliot, A. J. (1991).
Prejudice with and without compunction. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 60, 817– 830.
Devine, P. G., Plant, E. A., Amodio, D. M., Harmon-Jones, E., & Vance,
S. L. (2002). The regulation of explicit and implicit race bias: The role
of motivations to respond without prejudice. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 82, 835– 848.
Dovidio, J. F., Kawakami, K., & Gaertner, S. L. (2002). Implicit and

73

explicit prejudice and interracial interaction. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 82, 62– 68.
Dunton, B. C., & Fazio, R. H. (1997). An individual difference measure of
motivation to control prejudiced reactions. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 23, 316 –326.
Eriksen, B. A., & Eriksen, C. W. (1974). Effects of noise letters upon the
identification of target letters in a non-search task. Perception and
Psychophysics, 16, 143–149.
Falkenstein, M., Hohnsbein, J., Hoorman, J., & Blanke, L. (1991). Effects
of crossmodal divided attention on late ERP components: II. Error
processing in choice reaction tasks. Encephalography and Clinical Neurophysiology, 78, 447– 455.
Fiske, S. T., & Neuberg, S. L. (1990). A continuum model of impression
formation: Form category-based to individuating process as a function of
information, motivation, and attention. In M. P. Zanna (Ed.), Advances
in experimental social psychology (Vol. 23, pp. 1–108). San Diego, CA:
Academic Press.
Forster, K. I., & Forster, J. C. (2003). DMDX: A Windows display
program with millisecond accuracy. Behavior Research Methods, Instruments, and Computers, 35, 116 –124.
Gaertner, S. L., & Dovidio, J. F. (1986). The aversive form of racism. In
J. F. Dovidio & S. L. Gaertner (Eds.), Prejudice, discrimination, and
racism (pp. 61– 89). San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Gehring, W. J., & Fencsik, D. E. (2001). Functions of the medial frontal
cortex in the processing of conflict and errors. Journal of Neuroscience,
21, 9430 –9437.
Gehring, W. J., Goss, B., Coles, M. G. H., Meyer, D. E., & Donchin, E.
(1993). A neural system for error detection and compensation. Psychological Science, 4, 385–390.
Gollwitzer, P. M. (1999). Implementation intentions: Strong effects of
simple plans. American Psychologist, 54, 493–503.
Heller, W., & Levy, J. (1981). Perception and expression of emotion in
right-handers and left-handers. Neuropsychologia, 19, 263–272.
Holroyd, C. B., & Coles, M. G. H. (2002). The neural basis of human error
processing: Reinforcement learning, dopamine, and the error-related
negativity. Psychological Review, 109, 679 –709.
Jacoby, L. L. (1991). A process dissociation framework: Separating automatic from intentional uses of memory. Journal of Memory and Language, 30, 513–541.
Judd, C. M., Blair, I. V., & Champleau, K. M. (2004). Automatic stereotypes vs. automatic prejudice: Sorting out the possibilities in the Payne
(2001) weapon paradigm. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology,
40, 75– 81.
Kawakami, K., Dovidio, J. F., Moll, J., Hermsen, S., & Russin, A. (2000).
Just say no (to stereotyping): Effects of training on the negation of
stereotypic associations on stereotype activation. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 78, 871– 888.
Kerns, J. G., Cohen, J. D., MacDonald, A. W., Cho, R. Y., Stenger, V. A.,
& Carter, C. S. (2004, February 13). Anterior cingulate conflict monitoring and adjustments in control. Science, 303, 1023–1026.
Kiehl, K. A., Liddle, P. F., & Hopfinger, J. B. (2001). Error processing and
the rostral anterior cingulate: An event-related fMRI study. Psychophysiology, 37, 216 –223.
Lambert, A. J., Payne, B. K., Jacoby, L. L., Shaffer, L. M., Chasteen, A. L.,
& Khan, S. R. (2003). Stereotypes as dominant responses: On the “social
facilitation” of prejudice in anticipated public contexts. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 84, 277–295.
Luu, P., Collins, P., Tucker, D. M. (2000). Mood, personality, and selfmonitoring: Negative affect and emotionality in relation to frontal lobe
mechanisms of error monitoring. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
General, 129, 43– 60.
MacDonald W., III, Cohen, J. D., Stenger, V. A., & Carter, C. S. (2000,
June 9). Dissociating the role of the dorsolateral prefrontal and anterior
cingulate cortex in cognitive control. Science, 288, 1835–1838.

AMODIO, DEVINE, AND HARMON-JONES

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

74

Miller, E. K., & Cohen, J. D. (2001). An integrative theory of prefrontal
cortex function. Annual Review of Neuroscience, 24, 167–202.
Monteith, M. J. (1993). Self-regulation of stereotypical responses: Implications for progress in prejudice reduction. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 65, 469 – 485.
Monteith, M. J., Ashburn-Nardo, L., Voils, C. I., & Czopp, A. M. (2002).
Putting the brakes on prejudice: On the development and operation of
cues for control. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 83,
1029 –1050.
Monteith, M. J., & Voils, C. I. (1998). Proneness to prejudice responses:
Toward understanding the authenticity of self-reported discrepancies.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 75, 901–916.
Moskowitz, G. B., Gollwitzer, P. M., Wasel, W., & Schaal, B. (1999).
Preconscious control of stereotype activation through chronic egalitarian
goals. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 77, 167–184.
Nieuwenhuis, S., Ridderinkhof, K. R., Blom, J., Band, G. P. H., & Kok, A.
(2001). Error-related brain potentials are differently related to awareness
of response errors: Evidence from an antisaccade task. Psychophysiology, 38, 752–760.
Payne, B. K. (2001). Prejudice and perception: The role of automatic and
controlled processes in misperceiving a weapon. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 81, 181–192.
Payne, B. K. (2005). Conceptualizing control in social cognition: How
executive functioning modulates the expression of automatic stereotyping. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 89, 488 –503.
Payne, B. K., Lambert, A. J., & Jacoby, L. L. (2002). Best laid plans:
Effects of goals on accessibility bias and cognitive control in race-based
misperceptions of weapons. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology,
38, 384 –396.
Plant, E. A., & Devine, P. G. (1998). Internal and external motivation to
respond without prejudice. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 75, 811– 832.
Plant, E. A., Devine, P. G., & Brazy, P. C. (2003). The bogus pipeline and

ORDER FORM
$214.00, APA MEMBER/AFFILIATE
$464.00, INDIVIDUAL NONMEMBER
$1,450.00, INSTITUTION
In DC add 5.75% / In MD add 6% sales tax

TOTAL AMOUNT ENCLOSED

Received September 13, 2006
Revision received May 18, 2007
Accepted May 18, 2007 䡲

Check enclosed (make payable to APA)

Start my 2008 subscription to Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology ISSN: 0022-3514
___
___
___

motivations to respond without prejudice: Revisiting the fading and faking
of racial prejudice. Group Processes & Intergroup Relations, 6, 187–200.
Plant, E. A., Vance, S. L., & Devine, P. G. (2007). The intention underlying
control of prejudice: To hide or be free of bias. Unpublished manuscript,
University of Wisconsin.
Rabbit, P. M. A. (1966). Errors and error correction in choice-response
tasks. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 71, 264 –272.
Semlitsch, H. V., Anderer, P., Schuster, P., & Presslich, O. (1986). A
solution for reliable and valid reduction of ocular artifacts, applied to the
P300 ERP. Psychophysiology, 23, 695–703.
Shallice, T. (1982). Specific impairments of planning. Philosophical
Transactions of the Royal Society of London, B298, 199 –209.
Snyder, M., & Gangestad, S. (1986). On the nature of self-monitoring:
Matters of assessment, matters of validity. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 51, 125–139.
Tabachnick, B. G., & Fidell, L. S. (2001). Using multivariate statistics.
Needham Heights, MA: Allyn & Bacon.
van Veen, V., & Carter, C. S. (2002). The timing of action-monitoring
processes in the anterior cingulate cortex. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 14, 593– 602.
Wegener, D. T., & Petty, R. E. (1997). The flexible correction model: The
role of naı̈ve theories of bias in bias correction. In M. P. Zanna (Ed.),
Advances in experimental social psychology (Vol. 29, pp. 141–208).
Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Wilson, T. D., & Brekke, N. (1994). Mental contamination and mental
correction: Unwanted influences on judgments and evaluations. Psychological Bulletin, 116, 117–142.
Yeung, N., Botvinick, M. M., & Cohen, J. D. (2004). The neural basis of
error detection: Conflict monitoring and the error-related negativity.
Psychological Review, 111, 931–959.

_______
_______

Charge my:

VISA

MasterCard

Cardholder Name
Card No.

American
Express

Exp. Date

___________

_______
$ _______

Subscription orders must be prepaid. (Subscriptions are on
a calendar year basis only.) Allow 4-6 weeks for delivery of
the first issue. Call for international subscription rates.
SEND THIS ORDER FORM TO:
American Psychological Association
Subscriptions
750 First Street, NE
Washington, DC 20002-4242
Or call 800-374-2721, fax 202-336-5568.
TDD/TTY 202-336-6123.
For subscription information, e-mail:
subscriptions@apa.org

Signature (Required for Charge)

BILLING ADDRESS:
Street
City

State

Zip

State

Zip

Daytime Phone
E-mail

MAIL TO:
Name
Address
City
APA Member #

PSPA 08

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Correction to Amodio et al. (2008)
In the article “Individual Differences in the Regulation of Intergroup Bias: The Role of Conflict
Monitoring and Neural Signals for Control,” by David M. Amodio, Patricia G. Devine, and Eddie
Harmon-Jones (Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 2008, Vol. 94, No. 1, pp. 60 –74),
there was an error in Figure 4. The figure should appear as follows:

Figure 4. Mediation model illustrating how the difference between high-IMS/low-EMS and highIMS/high-EMS participants’ response accuracy on trials requiring the inhibition of automatic
stereotyping (Black–tool trials) was accounted for by error-related negativity (ERN) amplitudes on
Black–tool trials. Betas are reported (beta in parentheses represents the effect of group on response
accuracy before ERN scores were included in the regression model). Larger ERNs are represented
by more negative values. *p ⬍ .05. **p ⬍ .01.

