ATTITUDES AND SOCIAL COGNITION

Left Frontal Cortical Activation and Spreading of Alternatives: Tests of the
Action-Based Model of Dissonance
Eddie Harmon-Jones and Cindy Harmon-Jones

Meghan Fearn, Jonathan D. Sigelman, and
Peter Johnson

Texas A&M University

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

University of Wisconsin—Madison
The action-based model of dissonance predicts that following decisional commitment, approach-oriented
motivational processes occur to assist in translating the decision into effective and unconflicted behavior.
Therefore, the modulation of these approach-oriented processes should affect the degree to which
individuals change their attitudes to be more consistent with the decisional commitment (spreading of
alternatives). Experiment 1 demonstrated that a neurofeedback-induced decrease in relative left frontal
cortical activation, which has been implicated in approach motivational processes, caused a reduction in
spreading of alternatives. Experiment 2 manipulated an action-oriented mindset following a decision and
demonstrated that the action-oriented mindset caused increased activation in the left frontal cortical
region as well as increased spreading of alternatives. Discussion focuses on how this integration of
neuroscience and dissonance theory benefits both parent literatures.
Keywords: cognitive dissonance, action-based model, approach motivation, asymmetrical frontal cortical
activity, neurofeedback

motivating. Brehm and Cohen (1962), Wicklund and Frey (1981),
Beauvois and Joule (1996, 1999), and others pointed out that a
behavioral commitment is an important component of the dissonance process and that cognitive inconsistencies without implications for behavior are unlikely to provoke dissonance motivation.
However, they did not say why cognitions with implications for
behavior motivate persons to engage in discrepancy reductions.
The action-based model of cognitive dissonance was proposed
to answer the question, “Why?”(Harmon-Jones, 1999). The actionbased model concurs with other areas of psychological research in
proposing that perceptions and cognitions can serve as action
tendencies. It further proposes that dissonance between cognitions
evokes an aversive state because it has the potential to interfere
with effective and unconflicted action. Dissonance reduction, by
bringing cognitions into line with behavioral commitments, serves
the function of facilitating the execution of effective and unconflicted action (see also, Jones & Gerard, 1967).
The action-based model proposes both a proximal and a distal
motivation for the existence of dissonance processes. The proximal
motive for reducing dissonance is to reduce or eliminate the
negative emotion of dissonance. The distal motivation is the need
for effective and unconflicted action.
Past presentations of the theory of cognitive dissonance have
referred to two different constructs as “cognitive dissonance.” One
is the inconsistency between cognitions. The second is the unpleasant emotional/motivational state that occurs when a person
holds two contradictory cognitions. In order to better understand
the processes of dissonance, the action-based model distinguishes

Inspired by cognitive dissonance theory, hundreds of experiments have demonstrated that following a difficult decision, as
compared with an easy one, individuals change their attitudes to be
more consistent with their decision (e.g., Harmon-Jones & Mills,
1999; Wicklund & Brehm, 1976). That is, postdecisionally, individuals evaluate the chosen alternative more positively and the
rejected alternative more negatively than they did prior to the
decision. This effect has been referred to as “spreading of alternatives.” However, the original theory of dissonance never clearly
specified why cognitive discrepancy caused the negative emotive
state of dissonance and why individuals are motivated to reduce
dissonance and discrepancy.

Action-Based Model of Dissonance: Why Do Dissonance
Processes Occur?
Festinger (1957) posited no answer to the question of why
dissonance processes occur other than to state that inconsistency is

Eddie Harmon-Jones and Cindy Harmon-Jones, Department of Psychology, Texas A&M University; Meghan Fearn, Jonathan D. Sigelman, and
Peter Johnson, Department of Psychology, University of Wisconsin—
Madison.
This research was supported by National Science Foundation Grant
BCS-9910702. Thanks to Philip Gable, Carly Peterson, and Brandon
Schmeichel for helpful comments on an earlier version of this article.
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Eddie
Harmon-Jones, Department of Psychology, Texas A&M University, 4235
TAMU, College Station, TX 77843. E-mail: eddiehj@gmail.com

Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 2008, Vol. 94, No. 1, 1–15
Copyright 2008 by the American Psychological Association 0022-3514/08/$12.00
DOI: 10.1037/0022-3514.94.1.1

1

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

2

HARMON-JONES ET AL.

between the two. We refer to inconsistency between cognitions as
cognitive discrepancy, whereas we refer to the unpleasant emotive
state as dissonance. The unpleasant emotive state of dissonance
provides motivation to change one’s attitudes or engage in other
discrepancy-reduction processes.
After an individual makes a difficult decision, psychological
processing should assist with the execution of the decision. The
tendency of participants in dissonance research to view the chosen
alternative more favorably and the rejected alternative more negatively after a decision may help the individual to follow through
and act on the decision in a more effective manner.
As an example, imagine “Leon,” who has been offered jobs with
two different companies. The position offered by one company is
more intellectually stimulating, but the other company has friendlier coworkers. One company is located in a city with a pleasant
climate, but the other is in a city with a reasonable cost of living.
Leon sees both job positions as similarly attractive, although they
are quite different from each other, and he must decide between
them. Once Leon makes a decision, he will need to perform actions
in order to follow through with his decision. He will need to
relocate, learn new duties, and perform well at them. After his
decision, if he continues to see the two positions as similar in
attractiveness, he may experience excess regret, which could inhibit him from effectively following through with his decision.
However, if Leon is able to reduce dissonance, so that he views the
chosen position more positively and the rejected position more
negatively, then he will likely perform the job better and be more
satisfied. In contrast to models of cognitive dissonance that view
dissonance processes as irrational and maladaptive (Aronson,
1969), the action-based model views dissonance processes as
adaptive. Of course, adaptive, functional psychological processes
that are useful and beneficial in most circumstances may not be
beneficial in all circumstances. Occasionally, dissonance reduction
may cause persons to maintain a prolonged commitment to a
harmful chosen course of action, when it would be better to
disengage. However, when we state that dissonance processes are
adaptive, we mean that they benefit the organism in the majority of
cases. Thus, we propose that, in most cases, effectively following
through with behavior after a decision leads to a better outcome
than continuing to vacillate about the decision.

Action Orientation and Spreading of Alternatives
The postdecisional state is similar to the action-oriented state
(Beckmann & Irle, 1985; Gollwitzer, 1990; Heckhausen, 1986;
Kuhl, 1984), in which the individual is in a mode of “getting things
done.” Once a decision is made, an organism should be motivationally tuned toward enacting the decision and behaving effectively with regard to it. An implemental or action-oriented mindset
is one in which plans are made to execute behaviors associated
with the decision effectively (Gollwitzer & Bayer, 1999). The
individual is in an approach motivational state. When a person is
in an action-oriented state, implementation of decisions is enhanced (Gollwitzer & Bayer, 1999).
The action-oriented state is similar to Jones and Gerard’s (1967)
concept of an unequivocal behavior orientation. They posited that
the unequivocal behavior orientation “represents a commitment to
action in the face of uncertainty. Such a commitment involves the
risks of acting inappropriately, but such risks are assumed to be

less grave on the average than the risks of hesitant or conflicted
action.” (p. 185). They further posited, “When the time comes to
act, the great advantage of having a set of coherent internally
consistent dispositions is that the individual is not forced to listen
to the babble of competing inner forces” (p. 181).
Harmon-Jones and Harmon-Jones (2002) proposed that the
action-oriented state that follows decision making is equivalent to
the state in which dissonance motivation operates and discrepancy
reduction occurs. They hypothesized that experimentally manipulating the degree of action orientation experienced following a
decision should affect the degree of discrepancy reduction. In one
experiment, participants were asked to make either an easy decision or a difficult decision. Participants were asked to fill out a
mindset questionnaire after the decision. The neutral-mindset
questionnaire asked participants to list seven things they did in a
typical day, whereas the action-oriented mindset questionnaire
asked participants to list seven things they could do to perform
well on the physical exercise they had chosen. Participants were
then asked to reevaluate the exercises. Participants in the difficultdecision, action-oriented condition demonstrated a greater increase
in preference for the chosen over the rejected exercise (i.e., spreading of alternatives) than participants in the other conditions.
In a second experiment, Harmon-Jones and Harmon-Jones
(2002) replicated the results of the first experiment using a different manipulation of action orientation. In this experiment, action
orientation was induced by asking participants to think about a
project or goal that they intended to accomplish and to list the steps
they intended to use to successfully follow through with their
decision (Gollwitzer, 1990). The participants in the actionorientation condition engaged in more spreading of alternatives
following a difficult decision than did participants in the comparison conditions. This study replicated the results of the previous
study but provided stronger support for the action-based model
because the action-orientation induction was unrelated to the decision in the experiment.
Other correlational evidence suggests that action-oriented processing facilitates discrepancy reduction (Beckmann & Kuhl,
1984). In the Beckmann and Kuhl (1984) study, students searching
for an apartment were shown information about 16 apartments.
The students rated the attractiveness of the apartments before and
after choosing the apartment they preferred (i.e., before and after
a tentative decision). After the decision, individuals who were
dispositionally high in action orientation increased the attractiveness rating of their decision more than did individuals who were
dispositionally low in action orientation.

Dissonance and Neural Activity
These previous studies provide support for the action-based
model of dissonance (see also Harmon-Jones, Peterson, & Vaughn,
2003). The action-based model suggests which neural circuits are
involved in dissonance processes. When dissonance is aroused, it
evokes increased sympathetic nervous activity as measured by
increased skin conductance (Croyle & Cooper, 1983; Elkin &
Leippe, 1986; Harmon-Jones, Brehm, Greenberg, Simon, & Nelson, 1996). Neurally, dissonance should evoke activity in the
anterior circulate cortex (ACC), a structure that has been found to
be involved in the detection of cognitive conflict. Research has
suggested that activity in the ACC is involved in monitoring the

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

ACTION-BASED MODEL OF DISSONANCE

occurrence of errors or the presence of response conflict (e.g.,
Carter et al., 1998; Gehring, Goss, Coles, Meyer, & Donchin,
1993). More important, recent research has found increased ACC
activity when behavior conflicts with the self-concept (Amodio et
al., 2004). That is, Amodio et al. (2004) found that when individuals who were not prejudiced engaged in behaviors that violated
their nonprejudiced self-concept, they evidenced an increase in the
amplitude of an event-related brain potential referred to as the
error-related negativity, which has been found to be generated by
the ACC. This finding suggests that higher level conflicts, the type
with which dissonance theory has been most concerned, also
activate the ACC.
Once dissonance is aroused or conflict is detected by the ACC,
discrepancy reduction can occur rapidly. Indeed, past research has
revealed that behavioral commitment itself followed by immediate
attitude assessment is sufficient to detect attitude change (Rabbie,
Brehm, & Cohen, 1959). Discrepancy reduction engages approach
motivational processes, as the individual works to successfully
implement the new commitment. This increase in approach motivation should activate the left frontal cortex. Past research suggests
that the left frontal cortical region may be involved in approach
motivational processes aimed at resolving inconsistency. For example, event-related functional magnetic resonance imaging research has found that the left dorsolateral prefrontal cortex is more
active during preparation for color naming than during preparation
for word naming in a Stroop task (MacDonald, Cohen, Stenger, &
Carter, 2000). Also, more activity in this brain region was associated with less conflict (i.e., smaller reaction time interference
effects). MacDonald et al. (2000) suggested that these findings
support the hypothesis that the left dorsolateral prefrontal cortex is
involved “in the implementation of control, by representing and
actively maintaining the attentional demands of the task” (p.
1837). They also suggested that greater activity in the left dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, which implements control, should cause
reduced cognitive conflict (see also, van Veen & Carter, 2006).
Other findings obtained from a variety of methodological approaches have suggested that the left and right frontal cortical
regions have different motivational functions, with the left frontal
region being involved in approach motivational processes, and the
right frontal region being involved in withdrawal motivational
processes. For instance, Robinson and Downhill (1995) have observed that damage to the left frontal lobe causes depressive
symptoms. They have found that for persons with left-hemisphere
brain damage, the closer the lesion is to the frontal pole, the greater
the depressive symptoms.
The left prefrontal cortex is important for intention, selfregulation, and planning—functions involved in approach motivation and action-oriented processing (Knight & Grabowecky,
1995; Kuhl, 2000; Petrides & Milner, 1982; Tomarken &
Keener, 1998). These functions have often been described as
properties of the will, a hypothetical construct important in
guiding approach-related behavior. Persons with damage to this
region are apathetic, experience less interest and pleasure, and
have difficulty initiating actions. In addition to data obtained
from persons with brain lesions (e.g., Robinson & Downhill,
1995), research assessing electroencephalography (EEG) has
found that increased left frontal cortical activation relates to
state and trait tendencies toward approach motivation (HarmonJones & Allen, 1997, 1998; Sobotka, Davidson, & Senulis,

3

1992), independent of the valence—positivity or negativity— of
the approach motivation (Harmon-Jones, 2003; Harmon-Jones
& Allen, 1998; Harmon-Jones & Sigelman, 2001). Moreover,
increased left frontal activation relates to trait repression
(Tomarken & Davidson, 1994), and high-trait repression has
been linked to an increased likelihood of spontaneously reducing dissonance (Olson & Zanna, 1979). Trait repression may be
linked to a tendency to engage in positive illusory thinking
(Taylor & Brown, 1988), which may be associated with approach motivational tendencies (Taylor & Gollwitzer, 1995).

Experiment 1
On the basis of the preceding analysis, we predict that following
commitment to a chosen course of action, relative left frontal
cortical activity should be increased, and this increase in relative
left frontal cortical activity should be associated with the degree of
change in attitudes in support of the chosen course of action.
Previous research has revealed that a commitment to a chosen
course of action results in the increase of relative left frontal
cortical activity (Harmon-Jones, Gerdjikov, & Harmon-Jones, in
press). Moreover, this commitment (high-choice) caused attitudes
to be more consistent with the behavior, as compared with a
low-commitment (low-choice) condition. However, in past research, relative left frontal activation did not relate to attitudes,
perhaps because the attitude measure lacked the needed sensitivity
(e.g., it did not tap attitude change from precommitment, but only
tapped attitudes following the commitment).
In past research, when the psychological process (commitment
to a chosen course of action) was manipulated and the proposed
physiological substrate was measured (left frontal cortical activation), commitment to a chosen course of action increased relative
left frontal cortical activation (Harmon-Jones et al., in press). To
provide stronger causal inferences regarding the role of the left
frontal cortical region in following through with the commitment
(discrepancy reduction), it is important to manipulate the physiology and measure the psychological outcome. Manipulation of the
mediator also provides stronger causal evidence than simply correlating the proposed mediator with the outcome (Sigall & Mills,
1998; Spencer, Zanna, & Fong, 2005). In Experiment 1, after
participants made a difficult decision, participants’ relative left
frontal cortical activity was manipulated, and then attitudinal
spreading of alternatives was measured.
To manipulate relative left frontal cortical activity, we used neurofeedback training of EEG, also called EEG biofeedback training.
Neurofeedback presents the participant with real-time feedback on
brainwave activity. The feedback can be presented in the form of a
video display, vibration, or sound. If brainwave activity over a particular cortical region changes in the direction desired by the experiment, then the participant is given “reward” feedback; if brainwave
activity does not change in the desired direction, then either negative
feedback or no feedback is given. Rewards can be as simple as the
presentation of a tone that informs the participant that brain activity
has changed in the desired way. Neurofeedback-induced changes
result from operant conditioning, and as such, these changes in EEG
can occur without awareness of how the brain activity changes occurred (Kamiya, 1979; Siniatchkin, Kropp, & Gerber, 2000). This is
not to say that it is impossible for a participant to become aware of
how she or he caused the changes in brain activity, but research

HARMON-JONES ET AL.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

4

suggests that such awareness requires extensive practice (e.g., 8
weeks of practice; Kotchoubey, Kübler, Strehl, Flor, & Birbaumer,
2002), whereas the changes in brain activity due to conditioning occur
much more quickly.
In past research with clinically depressed individuals, neurofeedback training was used to increase relative left frontal activity, and it
led to less depression after approximately 27 training sessions (Baehr,
Rosenfeld, & Baehr, 2001). In other research with nondepressed
individuals, neurofeedback was effective at decreasing but not increasing relative left frontal activity after only 3 days of training. The
decrease in relative left frontal activity brought about with this brief
neurofeedback training caused less approach-related emotional responses (Allen, Harmon-Jones, & Cavender, 2001). On the basis of
these past results, we predicted that the decrease-left frontal condition
would be more successful at changing brain activity than the increaseleft frontal condition. Although past research with normal individuals
revealed that brief neurofeedback failed to increase relative left frontal
activity, we included this condition to have a proper neurofeedback
comparison condition for the decrease-left condition and to give the
increase-left neurofeedback another chance to produce significant
brainwave changes.
Most important, we predicted that a decrease in relative left
frontal activity would lead to a decrease in discrepancy reduction
as measured by spreading of alternatives. To test these predictions,
we used the decision paradigm based on the one developed by
Brehm (1956).

Method
Overview
Participants underwent 2 days of neurofeedback training designed to increase or decrease relative left frontal cortical activity.
On the third day, after making a difficult decision, they underwent
another neurofeedback training session of the same direction as
previous days (increase vs. decrease left). Finally, participants
rerated their decision alternatives. We predicted a manipulated
decrease, as compared with increase, in relative left frontal cortical
activity would cause a reduction in spreading of alternatives.

Participants and Procedures
Participants were 33 female introductory psychology students who
participated in exchange for extra credit toward their grade on Day 1
and then for $10 per hour on Days 2 and 3. On the basis of past
research suggesting that neurofeedback of asymmetrical frontal cortical activity produces effects after 3 consecutive days (Allen et al.,
2001), participants were administered 3 days of neurofeedback. They
were randomly assigned to feedback designed to either increase or
decrease relative left frontal cortical activity.
After participants provided informed consent and were prepared
for EEG recording on Day 1, their baseline EEG was collected for
8 min. Then, two 8-min blocks of neurofeedback occurred. On Day
2, four 8-min blocks of neurofeedback training occurred. For
neurofeedback training, participants were told that the activity of
their brains would cause a computer to generate tones and that they
should try to make the tone stay on, in order to receive more
payment. Participants were not told that neurofeedback was con-

tingent on asymmetry. No explicit verbal feedback was provided to
participants concerning their performance.
On Day 3, after the experimenter greeted participants, she
explained that the study would examine the relationship between
personality characteristics, brain activity, and preferences for different types of psychological research. She also explained that we
conduct lots of research in the department but have never asked
students how much they would like to participate in such research.
She explained that students’ preferences for the research may
affect their responses in the experiments, so we need to know
students’ preferences and how personality characteristics related to
these preferences. She then said that because the study is short and
will last only 20 min, she would have them participate in another
study. Then, participants provided informed consent.
The experimenter explained that in the first study, participants
would complete short questionnaires that assess preferences for different types of psychological research. The experimenter then shuffled a set of index cards that contained descriptions of nine research
projects (attention, attitudes and values, economics, health, law, linguistics, perceptual cognitive, perceptual motor, person perception).
The participants were given the cards and asked to read them in the
order in which they were presented and to then rate each project in
terms of how desirable it would be to participate in a study like the
one described on a 9-point scale (1 ⫽ not at all desirable, 9 ⫽ very
desirable). Participants were left alone to rate the projects. When the
participants informed the experimenter over the intercom that they
had completed the ratings, the experimenter returned to the participants’ room and asked the participants to rank order the projects on a
separate questionnaire. While the participants ranked the projects, the
experimenter, who was in the adjacent room, examined the participants’ ratings questionnaire and found which two projects had been
rated equally and relatively positively (approximately seven on the
9-point scale), as has been done in other research (Brehm, 1956;
Harmon-Jones & Harmon-Jones, 2002).
When the participants completed the rankings questionnaire, the
experimenter returned to the participants’ room and explained that
some of the studies that were just rated were being conducted now.
She then gave them a choice to participate in one of two studies.
After participants made their decision between two equally rated
alternatives, four 8-min neurofeedback training sessions occurred.
Then, the experimenter returned to the participant’s room with the
cards containing the research project descriptions. She explained that
we were also interested in how familiarity with the research descriptions might affect ratings of the research projects. She explained that
the psychology department was considering posting sign-up sheets
that contain more information about the experiments. She explained
that if this change occurred, then by the end of the semester, students
may have read the names and descriptions of some research projects
many times. She further explained that the psychology department
wanted us to assess how reading the research descriptions repeatedly
affects evaluations of the research. She then asked participants to rate
their current preferences for the research projects again.
Afterward, participants completed a questionnaire that asked
them to “explain what thoughts, feelings, etc. you had that caused
the tone to be played during the biofeedback training session.” In
the end, the experimenter questioned the participants about suspicion and explained the exact purpose of the experiment.

ACTION-BASED MODEL OF DISSONANCE

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

EEG Recording and Analyses
To record EEG, five electrodes mounted in a stretch-lycra electrode
cap (Electro-Cap, Eaton, OH) were placed on the participant’s head
using known anatomical landmarks (Blom & Anneveldt, 1982). EEG
was recorded from midfrontal (F3/4) and parietal (P3/4) regions. The
ground electrode was mounted in the cap on the mid-line between the
frontal pole and the frontal site. The reference electrode was placed at
the vertex (Cz), as done in past frontal asymmetry neurofeedback
studies (Allen et al., 2001). Vertical eye movements were recorded
from the supra- and suborbit of the left eye to eliminate trials with
eyeblinks. All electrode impedances were under 5,000 ⍀, and homologous sites (e.g., F3 and F4) were within 1,000 ⍀ of each other.
Electro-Gel (Eaton, OH) was used as the conducting medium. Signals
were amplified with J&J Engineering amplifiers (I-410; Poulsbo,
WA), bandpass-filtered 1-35 Hz, and sampled at 256 Hz. Alpha
power was computed, by bandpass filtering (8 –13 Hz) and then
rectifying the signals (1-s epochs). EEG alpha power over the frontal
cortices is inversely related to activity over the same cortical regions
measured using other methods such as positron emission tomography
(Cook, O’Hara, Uijtdehaage, Mandelkern, & Leuchter, 1998), functional magnetic resonance imaging (Goldman, Stern, Engel, & Cohen,
2002), and behavioral methods (Davidson, Chapman, Chapman, &
Henriques, 1990; Lindsley & Wicke, 1974). Recent source localization work has revealed that approach/withdrawal-related frontal EEG
alpha asymmetry reflects dorsolateral prefrontal cortical activity (Pizzagalli, Sherwood, Henriques, & Davidson, 2005).
On Day 1, baseline EEG was acquired for 8 min. After that period,
a separate experimenter, who did not interact with the participant,
computed the participant’s mean frontal difference and standard deviation. This second experimenter was used so that the experimenter
who interacted with participants was blind to condition. Then, this
second experimenter used the mean and standard deviation to establish a criterion value for the next block of neurofeedback training. The
criterion value was the mean of the previous block of EEG recording ⫹ 0.85 SD for participants in the increase-left frontal condition; it
was ⫺0.85 SD for participants in the decrease-left condition. For Day
2, the criterion value was determined from the mean frontal difference
and standard deviation of the last 16 min on Day 1. For Day 3, the
criterion value was determined from the mean frontal difference
and standard deviation from all of Day 2.
Thus, for the neurofeedback training, the computer determined
the difference in activity between frontal sites and compared this
value against the criterion value established from a previous recording. If the difference exceeded the criterion value in the
desired direction, then a tone was played over headphones. If it
was not exceeded, then no tone was played. Participants were
instructed to attempt to produce the tones. Epochs for which ocular
activity exceeded 50 ␮V resulted in no tone for the next 2 s.
Similar to past research (Allen et al., 2001), the criterion values
resulted in reinforcement on approximately 20% of trials, and the
rate of reinforcement was equivalent across days and groups. In
other words, there were no differences between experimental conditions in the participants’ abilities to achieve the criterion, and
thus, the conditions were equally difficult.

Rationale for Certain Design Issues
The effect of difficult decisions on spreading of alternatives has
been demonstrated in hundreds of experiments (for reviews, see

5

Brehm & Cohen, 1962; Festinger, 1964; Harmon-Jones & Mills,
1999; Wicklund & Brehm, 1976). In addition, published experiments found significant spreading of alternatives in difficult but
not easy decision conditions, using the same decision paradigm as
used in the present experiments (Harmon-Jones & Harmon-Jones,
2002). Thus, following much recent research on spreading of
alternatives (e.g., Hoshino-Browne et al., 2005; Steele, Spencer, &
Lynch, 1993), we did not include easy decision conditions.
Past neurofeedback studies have not included a “no-feedback”
condition because of the difficulties in making no-feedback conditions comparable to neurofeedback conditions (e.g., Allen et al.,
2001; Baehr et al., 2001; Hardman et al., 1997; Roberts, Birbaumer, Rockstroh, Lutzenberger, & Elbert, 1989). To be comparable to neurofeedback conditions, a no-feedback condition would
need to include “feedback” tones, and participants would need to
be told that their brainwaves were producing the tones. It is likely
that such sham feedback and instructions will not be neutral to
participants. Because of the robustness of the spreading-ofalternatives effect following difficult decisions in “neutral” conditions, we did not include a no-neurofeedback-training condition in
the present experiment. If the neurofeedback-induced manipulation of relative left frontal activity caused differences in spreading
of alternatives, then the results would support the predictions
derived from the action-based model. The question of whether the
neurofeedback training caused increased versus decreased spreading of alternatives relative to a no-feedback condition was not
important for the test of this theory-derived prediction. Rather, the
question we wanted to address was, “Does a manipulated change
in frontal asymmetry affect the degree of dissonance reduction?”
Also, given the concerns about the difficulty of creating a comparable no-feedback condition, such a condition was not included.

Results
The manipulation of relative left frontal activation was successful. On Day 3, the decrease-left frontal group showed less left
frontal cortical activity (M ⫽ ⫺0.187, SD ⫽ 0.329) than the
increase-left frontal group (M ⫽ 0.017, SD ⫽ 0.156); analysis of
covariance [ANCOVA] controlling for Day 1 baseline, F(1, 30) ⫽
4.48, p ⫽ .04, partial ␩2 ⫽ .13. An ANCOVA was performed so
that individual differences in baseline (Day 1) relative left frontal
activity could be statistically controlled. A one-way analysis of
variance (ANOVA) without the use of the baseline covariate was
also significant, F(1, 31) ⫽ 5.29, p ⫽ .03, partial ␩2 ⫽ .15.
In the condition in which participants received neurofeedback to
decrease left frontal cortical activity, there was a significant decrease in spreading of alternatives, as revealed in a significant
3-way (Neurofeedback Condition ⫻ Pre vs. Postdecision ⫻ Chosen vs. Rejected) interaction, F(1, 31) ⫽ 4.23, p ⬍ .05, partial
␩2 ⫽ .12. That is, within the decrease-left frontal condition, no
significant spreading of alternatives occurred, as revealed in a
nonsignificant 2 (pre- vs. postdecision) ⫻ 2 (chosen vs. rejected
alternative) within-subjects ANOVA, F(1, 15) ⫽ 0.26, p ⫽ .62,
partial ␩2 ⫽ .02. However, within the increase-left frontal condition, significant spreading of alternatives occurred, F(1, 16) ⫽
10.97, p ⫽ .004, partial ␩2 ⫽ .41. See Figure 1.
Another way to examine the attitude effects is to separately test for
changes in attitudes toward chosen alternatives and then rejected
alternatives. For chosen alternative attitudes, a 2 (condition) ⫻ 2

HARMON-JONES ET AL.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

6

Figure 1. Attitudes toward chosen and rejected decision alternatives pre- and postdecision, as a function of
neurofeedback condition. Error bars reflect ⫾ 1 standard error.

(predecision vs. postdecision) ANOVA produced a significant interaction, F(1, 31) ⫽ 5.73, p ⬍ .03, partial ␩2 ⫽ .16. Within the
increase-left frontal condition, the chosen alternative was evaluated
more positively following the decision ( p ⬍ .01), whereas within the
decrease-left frontal condition, the chosen alternative was not evaluated differently from pre- to postdecision ( p ⬎ .40). A similar
ANOVA conducted on evaluations of the rejected alternatives produced a nonsignificant interaction, F(1, 31) ⫽ 1.06, p ⬎ .30. Exploratory follow-up tests revealed that within the increase-left frontal
condition, attitudes toward the rejected alternative became more negative following the decision ( p ⬍ .04, one-tailed), whereas within the
decrease-left frontal condition, attitudes toward the rejected alternative did not change ( p ⬎ .70).
Neurofeedback training of relative left frontal activity did not
produce significant effects in the parietal region, as revealed in a
nonsignificant ANOVA, with neurofeedback-training condition as
the independent variable and parietal asymmetry as the dependent
variable (F ⬍ 1.0). This result, in conjunction with past results
(Harmon-Jones et al., in press), suggests that it is specifically the
left frontal regions that are involved in discrepancy reduction.

Correlational Analyses
Correlations between spreading of alternatives and relative left
frontal activation were examined to test whether the two variables
were related. It was expected that the greater the relative left
frontal activation, the greater the spreading of alternatives. Across
both conditions, spreading of alternatives was positively related to
relative left midfrontal activity (r ⫽ .40, p ⬍ .01, one-tailed).
When each condition was examined separately, this positive relationship between spreading of alternatives and relative left frontal

activity occurred, but it was not quite significant in either condition, perhaps because of the small sample size (increase left r ⫽
.40, p ⬍ .06, one-tailed; decrease left r ⫽ .30, p ⫽ .13, one-tailed).

Awareness of the Neurofeedback Learning Process
Participants’ open-ended responses to the questionnaire asking them what thoughts and feelings caused the tone to be
played were analyzed to explore whether participants’ conscious thoughts and feelings were related to the neurofeedback
training. Two independent raters blind to condition and other
data evaluated the open-ended responses. Agreement was
greater than 90% and resolved through discussion. Participants
gave a variety of responses. Some indicated that they did not
know what caused the tone to be played. Some indicated that
not thinking about the tone helped, whereas others indicated
that thinking about the tone helped. In addition, participants
described memories, songs, decisions, plans, letting their minds
wander, and relaxation as techniques that produced the tones.
These reports did not differ between conditions or relate significantly to relative left frontal activation. The reports were
also scored for the amount of approach motivation, avoidance
motivation, positive affect, and negative affect reported (1 ⫽
not at all and 5 ⫽ extremely). No differences between conditions resulted. Across conditions, relative left frontal activity
was negatively correlated with avoidance motivation (r ⫽
⫺.34, p ⫽ .05) and positively correlated, albeit nonsignificantly, with approach motivation (r ⫽ .24, p ⫽ .18). No other
correlations were significant. We also examined whether reports of motivation affected spreading of alternatives by conducting a regression analysis in which spreading was predicted

ACTION-BASED MODEL OF DISSONANCE

by condition, approach ratings, and avoidance ratings. Only
condition was a significant predictor (␤ ⫽ .40, p ⫽ .03); all
other predictors were nonsignificant ( ps ⬎ .10).

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Discussion
In support of predictions, Experiment 1 revealed that neurofeedback training caused a reduction in relative left frontal cortical
activity, which caused an elimination of the familiar spreading-ofalternatives effect. These results are consistent with the actionbased model of dissonance, which suggests that following commitment to a chosen course of action, approach-oriented
motivational processes are engaged to assist with the execution of
the decision. Together with past research showing that commitment to a chosen course of action increases activity in the left
frontal cortex (Harmon-Jones et al., in press), the present experiment’s manipulation of relative left frontal cortical activity, a
presumed mediator of the effect of commitment on discrepancy
reduction, provides strong support for the role of the left frontal
cortex in discrepancy reduction processes.
As noted earlier, neurofeedback-induced changes in the brain often
occur without conscious awareness of the process. In general, the
analyses of the open-ended responses were consistent with this past
research. However, some evidence suggested that participants who
wrote more avoidance-oriented (less approach-oriented) descriptions
evidenced lesser relative left frontal activation. These findings are
consistent with the motivational direction model of asymmetrical
frontal cortical activity, but the direction of causation (if one exists) is
difficult to determine. It is possible that the neurofeedback-induced
change in frontal asymmetry caused the motivationally relevant
“thoughts.” In contrast, the thoughts may have caused the changes in
frontal asymmetry. In a direct test of this latter idea, Hardman et al.
(1997) assigned participants to a strategy versus no-strategy condition
prior to neurofeedback training of asymmetrical frontal cortical activity. In the strategy condition, participants were instructed to think
happy (sad) thoughts as neurofeedback training occurred to increase
left (right) frontal cortical activity. Results indicated that both groups
learned, with the no-strategy group learning better than the strategy
group. Although these results suggest that it is unlikely that participants used emotional strategies to alter frontal EEG asymmetry, there
remain two possible explanations for how frontal EEG asymmetry
was altered. The first is that participants used some other strategy that
did not focus on emotions but that might plausibly impact asymmetry
in accord with predictions of the approach–withdrawal model. The
second alternative, and one that would be difficult to establish conclusively, is that the neurofeedback training impacted frontal EEG
asymmetry directly, without the use of such intervening strategies.
The significance of the present results do not hinge on accepting one
or the other of these alternatives. Either explanation supports the
conclusion that altering frontal asymmetry, either directly or indirectly, produces changes in postdecisional spreading of alternatives.

Experiment 2
Experiment 2 was designed to conceptually replicate Experiment 1.
Given the time-consuming and costly nature of neurofeedback training, in Experiment 2, we used a different manipulation to alter relative
left frontal cortical activity and to more specifically test the hypothesis
that changes in the degree of relative left frontal cortical activity

7

would affect attitudinal spreading of alternatives following commitment to a chosen course of action. In Experiment 2, we tested this
hypothesis by manipulating action-oriented processing following a
difficult decision. We expected to replicate past research that showed
that the action-oriented mindset would increase discrepancy reduction
following a decision (Harmon-Jones & Harmon-Jones, 2002). Second, we expected that the action-oriented mindset would increase
relative left frontal cortical activity. Finally, we expected that this
increase in left frontal cortical activity would relate to discrepancy
reduction, as assessed by spreading of alternatives.
To further extend past research, we included a condition to
manipulate positive affect that was low in approach motivation.
This was done to distinguish between the effects of positive affect
and of approach motivation on spreading of alternatives. Past
research suggested that action-oriented mindsets increase positive
affect (Taylor & Gollwitzer, 1995), but we do not predict that
positive affect, itself, causes increased left frontal cortical activity
or an increase in spreading of alternatives. Thus, the design and
predicted results for Experiment 2 would rule out an alternative
explanation of past research. According to this explanation, more
spreading of alternatives might have occurred in the actionoriented condition because persons in this condition felt more
positive affect, and this positive affect may have provided resources that assisted in discrepancy reduction. By demonstrating
that a low-approach positive affect manipulation does not cause an
increase in spreading of alternatives, the predicted results of Experiment 2 would eliminate this alternative explanation.

Method
Overview
Participants made a decision between two equally attractive
alternatives (difficult decision). They were then randomly assigned
to complete a questionnaire that induced an action-oriented, positive nonaction-oriented, or neutral mindset. Next, EEG was collected, and then participants reported their affective states. Finally,
participants rerated their decision alternatives. We predicted that
greater spreading of alternatives would occur in the action-oriented
condition as compared with the other conditions. Also, we predicted that the action-oriented condition would cause greater relative left frontal activity than the other conditions.

Participants
Fifty-seven (16 men and 41 women) students participated in
exchange for extra credit in their introductory psychology course.1
1

Experiment 1 comprised only women because more women were
available as possible participants when the experiment was conducted, and
we wanted to avoid any condition imbalances in gender in this laborintensive experiment. In Experiment 2, participants were not selected for
gender, but most were women because there were more women in introductory psychology. Past research with large gender-balanced samples on
asymmetrical frontal cortical activity and motivation (Harmon-Jones,
Sigelman, Bohlig, & Harmon-Jones, 2003) and on spreading of alternatives
(Harmon-Jones & Harmon-Jones, 2002) has revealed no gender differences. Thus, past research suggests that gender differences would not have
emerged in the present research had more gender-balanced samples been
available.

HARMON-JONES ET AL.

8

Participants were randomly assigned to one of three conditions:
action oriented, positive nonaction oriented, or neutral mindset.

wonderful for you. Think about this exceptional time and describe it
in enough detail so as to cover the space allotted on the following
pages. Select an exceptionally positive time in which something
happened to you that made you feel very good about yourself.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Procedure
The procedure for creating and assessing the spread of alternatives was identical to Experiment 1. Participants were asked to rate
their preferences for experiments in which they might participate.
Then, they were asked to choose between two experiments that
they had rated positively and similarly in attractiveness.
After the participants chose the experiment in which they would
like to participate, the experimenter explained that she needed to
prepare the materials and computer for the next study. She asked
participants to complete the personality questionnaires, which she
presented as part of the “first study” on personality and preferences
for different types of research. The experimenter handed the participants an envelope that contained the personality questionnaires
and asked the participants to return them to the envelope when the
questionnaires were completed. The “personality questionnaires”
constituted the mindset manipulation and were presented in an
envelope to keep the experimenter blind to condition.
After the questionnaires were completed, the experimenter
asked participants to sit still and think about the information they
gave in the questionnaires for 3 min while their EEG was recorded.
Then, the experimenter asked the participants to complete another
questionnaire, which assessed affect. Finally, participants rerated
all of the experiments, as in Experiment 1.
Mindset manipulation. For the mindset manipulation, participants were randomly assigned one of three questionnaires. Each
questionnaire, labeled The Projective Life Attitudes Assessment,
explained that the assessment was an innovative personality assessment and that descriptions about aspects of life tell us a
considerable amount about personality. It was explained that the
responses to this survey would be content analyzed to assess
dimensions of personality.
In the neutral-mindset condition, participants were told to think
about an ordinary day in their life. They were asked to describe the
day in enough detail so as to cover the space allotted. They were
asked to select a typical day in which an extremely positive or
negative event did not occur.
In the action-oriented mindset condition, participants were instructed to think about an intended project, defined as a project that
has a goal that they intend to accomplish someday. They were
informed that the intended project should be one in which they
have decided to take action. They were asked to write about a
project that was complex but could be achieved within the next 3
months. They were to list the project; the five most important steps
to bring about this project; and when, where, and how each step
will be performed (Taylor & Gollwitzer, 1995).
In the positive-nonaction-oriented mindset condition, participants were instructed to think about a day or time when something
happened that caused them to feel very good about themselves
(e.g., a special time with loved ones, friends, and the like). They
were instructed to describe an event
that happened to you and not one that resulted from something you
did. An example would be a time when someone did something

Affect questionnaire. Items were included to assess positive
affect (enthusiastic, interested, happy, proud, feel good about
myself; Cronbach’s ␣ ⫽ .78) and negative affect (uncomfortable,
tense, displeased with myself, uneasy, unsure; Cronbach’s ␣ ⫽
.81). Participants were instructed to indicate how they felt right
now (1 ⫽ not at all; 5 ⫽ extremely).

EEG Recording and Analyses
EEG was recorded from 27 (22 homologous and 5 midline)
electrodes mounted in a stretch-lycra electrode cap (Electro-Cap,
Eaton, OH). EEG was recorded from the frontal, central, temporal,
parietal, and occipital regions (and regions in between) using the
10% electrode system (Chatrian, Lettich, & Nelson, 1985). The
ground electrode was mounted in the cap on the midline between
the frontal pole and the frontal site. The reference electrode was
placed on the left ear (A1), and data were also acquired from an
electrode placed on the right ear (A2) so that an offline digitally
derived, averaged ears’ reference could be computed. Eye movements were also recorded using an electrooculogram (EOG) to
facilitate artifact scoring of the EEG. EOG was recorded from the
supra- and suborbit of the left eye, to assess vertical eye movements, and from the left- and right-outer canthus, to assess horizontal eye movements. All electrode impedances were under 5,000
⍀, and homologous sites (e.g., F3 and F4) were within 1,000 ⍀ of
each other. Electro-Gel (Eaton, OH) was used as the conducting
medium. EEG and EOG were amplified with Neuroscan Synamps
(Herndon, VA), bandpass filtered (0.1–100 Hz; 60-Hz notch filter
enabled), digitized at 500 Hz, and stored onto a computer hard
drive. Prior to running each participant, to assess the technical
integrity of the recording system, 400 microvolts 20-Hz calibration
signals were run and inspected.
The EEG and EOG signals were visually scored on a highresolution computer monitor, and portions of the data that contained eye movements, muscle movements, or other sources of
artifact were removed. When artifact occurred in one channel at a
point in time, data from all channels were removed at that point in
time. Derived averaged-ears reference data were used for further
data reduction, as past research has found it to be an appropriate
reference (Hagemann, Naumann, Becker, Maier, & Bartussek,
1998). All artifact-free epochs that were 2.048 s in duration were
extracted through a Hamming window, which was used to prevent
spurious estimates of spectral power. Contiguous epochs were
overlapped by 75% to minimize loss of data due to Hamming
window extraction. A fast Fourier transform was used to calculate
the power spectra. These power values were averaged across the
2.048-s epochs of a given trial. Total power within the alpha (8 –13
Hz) frequency range was obtained. The power values were log
transformed for all sites to normalize the distributions.
Asymmetry indexes (natural log right ⫺ natural log left alpha
power) were computed for all homologous sites (Fp1/2, F3/4, F7/8,
Ft7/8, Fc3/4, T3/4, T5/6, C3/4, Cp3/4, P3/4, O1/2) for the 3 min

ACTION-BASED MODEL OF DISSONANCE

following the mindset manipulation. Because alpha power is inversely related to cortical activity, higher scores on the indexes
indicate greater relative left-hemisphere activity.

Results
Two independent raters read and evaluated each response to the
mindset manipulation. They agreed completely. All participants
correctly followed the instructions for their mindset condition.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Spreading of Alternatives
To test the effects of mindset manipulation on attitudes, a 3
(mindset) between-participants ⫻ 2 (predecision vs. postdecision) ⫻ 2 (chosen vs. rejected alternative) within-participants
ANOVA was performed. It produced the critical three-way interaction, F(2, 54) ⫽ 3.19, p ⬍ .05, partial ␩2 ⫽ .11; see Figure 2. To
decompose this interaction, 2 (predecision vs. postdecision) ⫻ 2
(chosen vs. rejected alternative) within-participants ANOVAs
were conducted within each between-participants condition. First,
it is important to note that the spreading of alternatives occurred
within the neutral-mindset condition, as demonstrated by a significant 2 (predecision vs. postdecision) ⫻ 2 (chosen vs. rejected
alternative) interaction, F(1, 19) ⫽ 7.25, p ⬍ .02, partial ␩2 ⫽ .28.
Second, spreading of alternatives also occurred within the actionoriented mindset condition interaction, F(1, 17) ⫽ 76.58, p ⬍ .001,
partial ␩2 ⫽ .81. Finally, significant spreading of alternatives
occurred within the positive-nonaction mindset condition interaction, F(1, 17) ⫽ 11.77, p ⬍ .003, partial ␩2 ⫽ .40.
The above interactions were followed up by examining the
attitude change toward the chosen and rejected alternatives
within each between-subjects condition. Within the neutral

9

condition, attitudes toward the chosen alternative did not
change from pre- to postdecision, but attitudes toward the
rejected alternative did change ( p ⬍ .01). Within the actionoriented mindset condition, attitudes toward the chosen alternative and attitudes toward the rejected alternative changed
( ps ⬍ .01). Finally, within the positive-nonaction mindset
condition, attitudes toward the chosen alternative did not
change from pre- to postdecision, but attitudes toward the
rejected alternative did change ( p ⬍ .01).
Another way to follow up the above 3-way interaction is to
examine attitude change toward the chosen (or rejected) alternative
between conditions. For the chosen alternative, a 3 (condition) ⫻
2 (predecision vs. postdecision) ANOVA produced a significant
interaction, F(2, 54) ⫽ 5.94, p ⬍ .005, partial ␩2⫽ .18. Attitudes
toward the chosen alternative changed significantly from pre- to
postdecision only within the action-oriented mindset condition
( p ⬍ .01). For the rejected alternative, a similar ANOVA was
conducted, but the interaction was not significant, F(2, 54) ⫽ 0.50.
Follow-up simple-effects tests to explore the pattern of means
revealed that the action-oriented mindset caused more derogation
of the rejected alternative than the positive-nonaction-oriented
condition ( p ⬍ .05, one-tailed), but not the neutral condition ( p ⬎
.18).
We next analyzed the spreading-of-alternatives index (difference in postdecision attitudes ⫺ difference in predecision attitudes), using a planned comparison, in which the action-oriented
condition was pitted against the other two conditions (2, ⫺1, ⫺1).
It was significant, F(1, 54) ⫽ 6.37, p ⬍ .02, partial ␩2 ⫽ .11. More
spreading of alternatives occurred in the action-oriented mindset
condition (M ⫽ 2.72, SD ⫽ 1.32) than in other conditions (neutral
M ⫽ 1.40, SD ⫽ 2.33; positive nonaction M ⫽ 1.37, SD ⫽ 1.74;

Figure 2. Attitudes toward chosen and rejected decision alternatives pre- and postdecision, as a function of
mindset condition. Error bars reflect ⫾ 1 standard error.

HARMON-JONES ET AL.

10

all ps ⬍ .04). The latter two conditions did not differ from each
other on spreading of alternatives ( p ⬎ .90).2

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Self-Reported Affect
The effects of the mindset manipulation on each affect index
were tested in separate analyses. For positive affect, a planned
comparison that pitted the action-oriented and positive-nonaction
conditions against the neutral condition (1, 1, ⫺2) was conducted,
and it was significant, F(1, 54) ⫽ 13.47, p ⬍ .001, partial ␩2 ⫽
.24. It indicated that the action-oriented (M ⫽ 2.99, SD ⫽ 0.77)
and positive-nonaction mindsets (M ⫽ 3.41, SD ⫽ 0.76) evoked
more positive affect than did the neutral-mindset condition (M ⫽
2.51, SD ⫽ 0.48; all ps ⬍ .04). For negative affect, a one-way
ANOVA was conducted because there were no a priori predictions. The ANOVA was not significant ( p ⬎ .75; Ms ranged from
1.70 to 1.85).

Within-condition correlations between spreading of alternatives
and relative left frontal activation were examined to test whether
the two variables were positively related within the action-oriented
condition. Within the action-oriented mindset condition, spreading
of alternatives was positively related to relative left midfrontal
activity (r ⫽ .72, p ⬍ .01). Within the other two conditions, no
significant associations of spreading of alternatives and relative
left frontal activity emerged (positive nonaction r ⫽ ⫺.28; neutral
r ⫽ .29; ps ⬎ .20). These latter correlations do not significantly
differ from zero and are thus difficult to interpret. This is not
surprising because, in these conditions, participants were instructed to think of neutral and positive-nonaction information, and
thus these EEG measurements do not directly reflect neural activity associated with postdecision processing. In contrast, participants in the action-oriented mindset condition were instructed to
think about information that should facilitate dissonance reduction,
according to the action-based model and previous research
(Harmon-Jones & Harmon-Jones, 2002).

Cortical Activation
We predicted that the action-oriented mindset condition, as
compared with the other conditions, would cause greater relative
left midfrontal activation because past research has implicated this
region in approach-motivational processes (see Experiment 1; for
a review, see Coan & Allen, 2004). A planned comparison for
midfrontal sites (F3, F4) pitting the action-oriented mindset condition against the other two conditions was significant, F(1, 54) ⫽
7.07, p ⬍ .02, partial ␩2 ⫽ .12. Each condition differed from the
action-oriented mindset condition ( ps ⬍ .05). Because some past
research has also suggested that lateral frontal regions may be
involved in motivational processes, a similar planned comparison
for lateral frontal sites (F7, F8) was conducted. It was also significant, F(1, 53) ⫽ 8.08, p ⬍ .01, partial ␩2⫽ .14. Each condition
differed from the action-oriented mindset condition ( ps ⬍ .04).
All other possible asymmetries were evaluated using one-way
ANOVAs, and all were nonsignificant ( ps ⬎ .06), except for
frontal central sites (FC3, FC4), F(2, 50) ⫽ 3.38, p ⬍ .05, partial
␩2 ⫽ .12. This significant effect revealed that the action-oriented
condition differed from the neutral condition ( p ⬍ .02) and that the
positive-nonaction condition was between the other two conditions
and not different from either one ( ps ⬎ .14). See Table 1 for means
and standard deviations for the significant effects.

Table 1
Means and Standard Deviations for Asymmetries at Frontal
Sites
Action
oriented
Variable

M

SD

Positive no
action
M

SD

Neutral
M

Discussion
Results from Experiment 2 were consistent with predictions and
revealed that the action-oriented mindset increased relative left
frontal cortical activity and spreading of alternatives. These results
provide a conceptual replication of the results of Experiment 1 by
using a different operationalization of action-oriented motivational
processing. Both experiments revealed that the hypothesized increase in action-oriented processing was manifested in increased
relative left frontal cortical activity.
These results extend past research on the action-based model in
two important ways. First, although previous studies have shown
that commitment to a chosen course of action, as compared with a
no-choice condition, increases relative left frontal cortical activity
and dissonance-related attitude shifts (Harmon-Jones et al., in
press), the present results show that manipulation of the presumed
psychobiological process—action-oriented processing/relative left
frontal cortical activity—increases attitudinal shifts in support of
the chosen course of action. Second, the results of Experiment 2
suggest that Experiment 1’s neurofeedback-induced changes in
relative left frontal activity was likely due to the effect of that brain
region’s alteration on action-oriented processing, albeit without
participant awareness. That is, when taken together with past
research, the results of the present two experiments strongly suggest that the process of dissonance reduction following commitment is due to action-oriented processing, which is evident in
relative left frontal cortical activation. Other neural structures,
chemicals, and mechanisms are likely involved in action-oriented
processing, but the present results suggest that at least relative
frontal cortical activation is involved.

SD

Midfrontal (F3, F4) 0.082 0.103a
0.022 0.066b
0.008 0.093b
Lateral frontal
(F7, F8)
0.027 0.167a ⫺0.072 0.115b ⫺0.100 0.128b
Frontal central
(FC3, FC4)
0.068 0.155a ⫺0.014 0.146a,b ⫺0.078 0.186b
Note. More positive scores reflect greater left than right-hemispheric
activity. Within rows, means with different subscripts are significantly
different from one another at p ⬍ .05.

2
As predicted, the decrease-left frontal condition eliminated spreading
of alternatives. This was established by comparing spreading in the
decrease-left frontal condition from Experiment 1 with the spreading in the
neutral condition from Experiment 2. That is, spreading of alternatives in
the decrease-left condition of Experiment 1 was smaller than spreading of
alternatives in the neutral condition of Experiment 2, t(33) ⫽ 2.15, p ⬍ .04.
This result suggests that the decrease-left condition not only eliminated
significant spreading of alternatives but also caused less spreading of
alternatives than a neutral condition.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

ACTION-BASED MODEL OF DISSONANCE

Another way to examine the effect of relative left frontal cortical
activity on spreading of alternatives is to conduct the regression
analyses suggested by Baron and Kenny (1986). In both of the
present experiments, the first two conditions suggested by Baron
and Kenny (1986) were met; that is, condition predicted relative
left frontal activity and spreading of alternatives. In Experiment 1,
when condition (effect coded) and relative left frontal activity were
entered to predict spreading of alternatives simultaneously, relative
left frontal activity emerged as a marginally significant predictor
(␤ ⫽ .32, p ⫽ .08, two-tailed), whereas condition was not a
significant predictor (␤ ⫽ .23, p ⫽ .21). In Experiment 2, when
condition (effect coded) and relative left frontal activity (F3, F4)
were entered to predict spreading of alternatives simultaneously,
relative left frontal activity emerged as a significant predictor (␤ ⫽
.26, p ⫽ .05), whereas condition was marginally significant (␤ ⫽
.24, p ⫽ .08). These results provide some, albeit weak, evidence
for partial statistical mediation, even though these experimental
designs lacked power because of their small sample sizes.
The above pattern of results is consistent with much past research on dissonance and mediating variables. When researchers
have sought evidence of the statistical mediating effect of emotion/
motivation variables on dissonance reduction, the evidence has
generally been nonsupportive (for a review, see Harmon-Jones,
2000b). For instance, studies have failed to demonstrate that selfreported negative affect or electrodermal activity mediates the
relationship between choice and attitude change (Elliot & Devine,
1994; Harmon-Jones, 2000a; Harmon-Jones et al., 1996; Higgins,
Rhodewalt, & Zanna, 1979). However, in spite of the fact that
statistical mediation has not been demonstrated, it is well accepted
that dissonance-produced negative affect does indeed mediate the
relationship of choice and attitude change. The research supporting
this mediation is based not on statistical mediation but on experimental mediation of two forms. First, research using the misattribution paradigm has found that the opportunity to misattribute
negative affect to a stimulus other than dissonance reduced the
attitude change following freely choosing to engage in counterattitudinal behavior (e.g., Higgins et al., 1979; Zanna & Cooper,
1974). Second, other research has revealed that increasing negative
affect through independent means (e.g., frowning) increases attitude change following counterattitudinal behavior and that decreasing negative affect/increasing positive affect decreases attitude change following counterattitudinal behavior (e.g., Kidd &
Berkowitz, 1976; Rhodewalt & Comer, 1979; Steele, Southwick,
& Critchlow, 1981). Why experimental mediation produces more
favorable evidence than statistical mediation for the predicted
mediational processes is presently unknown, but it may be due to
the drawbacks of statistical mediation discussed by Spencer et al.
(2005).

General Discussion
The results of the present experiments support the action-based
model of dissonance that predicts that the process of dissonance
reduction involves an approach-related action orientation that is
instantiated in relative left frontal cortical activity. Experiment 1
provided evidence that the relative left frontal activation was
causally involved in the spreading-of-alternatives effect, as manipulation of relative left frontal activation affected the degree of
spreading of alternatives (Sigall & Mills, 1998). Experiment 2

11

provided evidence supportive of the idea that action orientation
increased left frontal cortical activity and spreading of alternatives.

Asymmetrical Frontal Cortical Activity
In addition to supporting predictions derived from the actionbased model, the present experiments enhance researchers’ understanding of the left prefrontal cortex and its role in the implementation of intentions, as it demonstrates that left prefrontal cortical
activity is involved in the attitude change following decisions.
The results of Experiment 1 provide further evidence that neurofeedback training can be used to alter asymmetrical frontal
cortical activity and that such alterations have consequences for
motivational processes such as cognitive discrepancy reduction.
This is the first demonstration that neurofeedback training of
asymmetrical frontal cortical activity has effects on cognitivemotivational variables other than those more directly related to
emotional expression such as depression (Baehr et al., 2001) and
facial muscle responses to affective film clips (Allen et al., 2001).
The results of Experiment 2 suggest that positive affect per se is
not related to relative left frontal activation. Instead, approach
motivation, which in the present experiment was associated with a
certain kind of positive affect, is related to relative left frontal
activation. This result adds to a growing body of research challenging the idea that asymmetrical frontal cortical activity is associated with affective valence (where left frontal activity is posited to be related to positive affect, and right frontal activity is
posited to be related to negative affect; see, e.g., Heller, Nitschke,
& Miller, 1998). The present research provides convergent evidence that asymmetrical frontal cortical activity is associated with
motivational direction (approach motivation), not affective valence
(positive affect). Previous research has shown that approachoriented anger, which is negative in valence, is related to greater
relative left frontal activation (for a review, see Harmon-Jones,
2003). Experiment 2’s results extend this previous work by showing that positive affect low in approach motivation does not
increase relative left frontal activation, but positive affect high in
approach motivation does.
We have suggested that the observed increase of left frontal
cortical activity reflects approach-related action orientation. This
interpretation is consistent with much research (see reviews by
Coan & Allen, 2004; Harmon-Jones, 2003, 2004; Pizzagalli,
Shackman, & Davidson, 2003). It is possible that an approachrelated action orientation at this cortical level reflects both the
strengthening of the approach action tendencies and the inhibition
of action tendencies that would interfere with the execution of the
action. Past research showing that approach-oriented anger is
associated with greater relative left frontal cortical activity is
consistent with this possibility, as approach-oriented anger often
involves the suppression of fear and anxiety (van Honk & Schutter,
2006, 2007), emotions that would interfere with angry behavior.
Along these lines, the evidence gathered to date on dissonance
reduction, approach motivation manipulations, and relative left
frontal cortical activations provides evidence for both the selective
strengthening of the chosen alternative and inhibition or derogation of the rejected alternative. In the Harmon-Jones and HarmonJones (2002) experiments, it was observed that the attitude change
caused by an action-oriented mindset was primarily increased
derogation of the rejected alternative. In the Harmon-Jones et al.

HARMON-JONES ET AL.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

12

(in press) experiment, the high-choice manipulation caused increased left frontal cortical activation and attitude change primarily toward the negative aspects of the attitudinal issue; that is,
high-choice participants, as compared with low-choice participants, evaluated an increase in tuition as less bad and unfair but not
more wise and favorable. In the present research, both experiments
suggested that the manipulations of action-oriented processing
primarily influenced attitudes toward the chosen alternative. According to the original theory of dissonance, one or both attitude
change processes can occur to reduce dissonance. Past research has
demonstrated that both types of processes occur (e.g., Wicklund &
Brehm, 1976). However, it is unclear when changes toward the
chosen or changes toward the rejected or both types of changes
will occur. One experiment has suggested that the initial attitude
toward the alternatives will influence the direction of change
(Shultz, Leveille, & Lepper, 1999). It is also likely that other
variables, such as importance of the decision alternatives and
resistance to change of the alternatives, will play a role. Future
research will need to explore these issues.
Left frontal activity is not only associated with approach motivational processes. Other studies have found that left frontal activity is associated with language, semantic memory retrieval, and
episodic memory encoding (Cabeza & Nyberg, 2000). However, it
does not seem plausible that these cognitive processes provide
alternative explanations for why action orientation increases left
frontal activity and why the same orientation causes greater attitude change in support of the behavior. Moreover, the reduction of
these cognitive processes via neurofeedback-induced deactivation
of relative left frontal activation would not be predicted to decrease
spreading of alternatives.

Other Modes of Dissonance Reduction
Would a change in relative left frontal cortical activity affect
discrepancy reduction in other dissonance-evoking situations? We
would expect left frontal cortical activity to affect dissonance
processes when dissonance is aroused by a strong commitment to
behavior, which is what typically occurs in the induced compliance
and free-choice paradigms (e.g., Beauvois & Joule, 1996; Brehm
& Cohen, 1962). In such situations, we predict that individuals are
motivated to follow through with their behavioral commitment and
to change their attitudes to be consistent with their behavior
(Stone, Wiegand, Cooper, & Aronson, 1997). However, in some
induced compliance situations, individuals may reduce dissonance
by means other than attitude change, perhaps because their commitment is not sufficiently strong or because their original attitude
is highly resistant to change (Simon, Greenberg, & Brehm, 1995).
Thus, in other dissonance paradigms, we would predict relative left
frontal activation to relate to dissonance reduction to the extent
that dissonance is likely to be reduced via approach motivational
processes, such as changing one’s attitudes to be more supportive
of the recent behavioral commitment.
Changing one’s cognitions to bring them in alignment with each
other (discrepancy reduction) is one way of reducing the negative
emotion of dissonance. This is the method of reducing dissonance
most often measured in research. However, this is not the only way
persons can deal with the emotive state of dissonance. It is also
possible to trivialize the cognitions (Simon et al., 1995). Drinking
alcohol after performing a counterattitudinal act has been shown to

eliminate attitude change, presumably by reducing the negative
emotional state and therefore the motivation to engage in discrepancy reduction (Steele et al., 1981). The action-based model would
predict that reducing dissonance by means other than attitude
change would be more likely when action was not greatly needed
or when the action implications of the cognitions were low.
It is also possible to experience dissonance and not do anything
to reduce it. The negative emotion of dissonance provides motivation, but just because an individual is motivated to do something
does not necessarily mean that he or she acts on the motivation. He
or she might, instead, continue to experience cognitive discrepancy, in which case, the action-based model predicts that negative
affect would remain elevated. The action-based model also predicts that if an individual experienced dissonance and did not
reduce it, then the effectiveness of his or her behavior would be
hampered. These and other ways of dealing with cognitive discrepancies, and with the negative emotion of dissonance, need to
be considered in future research.
The action-based model does not make the claim that dissonance reduction in the direction of a decision always occurs.
Sometimes a person makes a decision, and the evidence is overwhelming that the wrong decision has been made. This information would arouse dissonance. When a person realizes that he or
she has made a mistake, his or her original decision is no longer the
cognition most resistant to change. Consider Leon, who took a new
job. After beginning the job, Leon might realize that it is completely unsuitable for him. He will likely not be able to reduce the
dissonance associated with his decision; in fact, the negative
emotion of dissonance will increase. At some point, if dissonant
cognitions continue to increase, then he may reverse his decision
and look for a different job (Festinger, 1957, reports the results of
such an experiment). Like the original theory of dissonance, the
action-based model predicts that the direction of attitude change
will be in the direction of the cognition that is most resistant to
change.
The action-based model assumes that dissonance processes operate because they are functional, that is, most often useful for the
organism. However, the action-based model does not claim that
dissonance reduction is always functional. We think of dissonance
processes as being similar to other functional, motivated behaviors
such as eating. Eating is necessary for the survival of the organism;
however, disordered eating can be harmful by leading to obesity
and associated health risks. Similarly, if a person makes a poor
decision and then reduces the dissonance associated with the
decision, then he or she will persist in acting on the decision. The
action-based model proposes that dissonance reduction, although
not always functional, is functional more often than not. In the
majority of cases, it is advantageous for persons to reduce dissonance and act effectively on their decisions. The dissonancereduction mechanism down-regulates continued psychological
conflict that would interfere with effective action.

Comparison to Other Theories Concerned With
Dissonance Processes
Self-consistency and self-affirmation models have each proposed different underlying motivations for dissonance reduction.
According to the self-consistency model, individuals experience
dissonance when they perceive themselves as behaving immorally,

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

ACTION-BASED MODEL OF DISSONANCE

incompetently, or irrationally (Aronson, 1969, 1999). The selfaffirmation model (Steele, 1988) posits that “dissonance is not
fundamentally the distress of psychological inconsistency, or more
particularly the distress of self-inconsistency, but the distress of a
threatened sense of self-integrity” (Steele et al., 1993, p. 893). One
of the primary predictions of these self-models is that self-esteem
should moderate discrepancy reduction, but the two models make
opposite predictions. That is, the self-consistency model predicts
that high self-esteem individuals should show more evidence of
dissonance because the degree of inconsistency should be greater
for high- than low self-esteem persons. In contrast, the selfaffirmation model predicts that low self-esteem individuals should
show more evidence of dissonance (i.e., attitude change) because
they possess fewer resources with which to deal with the dissonance. Results concerning these predictions are mixed. Most recent research on these models has found that self-esteem does not
moderate dissonance reduction unless the self is primed in near
temporal proximity to the dissonance-inducing situation (Steele et
al., 1993; Stone & Cooper, 2003).
In addition, self-models of dissonance have difficulty explaining
the dissonance effects produced in rats (Lawrence & Festinger,
1962), which are believed to lack self-conceptions of morality,
rationality, and competence. On the basis of the past research, it is
probably most accurate to suggest that the self-models provide
variables that may affect the magnitude and/or direction of discrepancy reduction (e.g., attitude change), but these self-models do
not provide explanations of the basic dissonance motivation.
We suggest that the action-based model provides an explanation
of the underlying, basic motivation behind dissonance processes.
The action-based model assumes that, in most cases, dissonance
processes are behaviorally adaptive. Dissonance reduction primarily functions to facilitate effective action. The reason organisms
experience discomfort when they hold conflicting cognitions is
because conflicting cognitions impede effective action. More important, the action-based model generated the present predictions,
whereas the self versions of dissonance would not have generated
such predictions.
Notwithstanding the above-mentioned theoretical differences,
one may question whether the manipulation of relative left frontal
cortical activity (Experiment 1) or the manipulation of action
orientation (Experiment 2) affected self-esteem, and this change in
self-esteem caused the change in spreading of alternatives. First,
for this explanation to be plausible, one would have to argue that
the relative left frontal deactivation and action orientation affected
self-esteem. However, there are no previous data to support such a
claim. In addition, in Experiment 2, negative affect did not differ
between conditions, and the action-orientation and positivenonaction condition showed equivalent increases in positive affect.
These results, therefore, do not support an alternative interpretation on the basis of self-esteem because positive and negative
affect measures are affected by self-esteem manipulations. Additional one-way ANOVAs on the two items most similar to items
on self-esteem scales (“feel good about myself”; “displeased with
myself”) revealed no significant effects of condition ( ps ⬎ .20).

Summary and Conclusion
By connecting over 50 years of behavioral research on cognitive
dissonance processes with more recent neuroscience theory and

13

research on the motivational functions of asymmetrical frontal
cortical activity, the present research supports a recently developed
conceptual understanding of dissonance reduction processes.
Rather than focusing on irrational defenses of the ego, the actionbased model suggests that dissonance processes are motivational
processes that assist in the implementation of intentions and commitments and may ultimately assist in facilitating effective behavior. It is hoped that this new way of thinking about dissonance
processes will stimulate research on dissonance theory and assist
in connecting the large body of dissonance theory evidence with
other research literatures concerned with action orientation, behavioral regulation, emotion regulation, and the neural processes that
underlie these important psychological processes.

References
Allen, J. J. B., Harmon-Jones, E., & Cavender, J. (2001). Manipulation of
frontal EEG asymmetry through biofeedback alters self-reported emotional responses and facial EMG. Psychophysiology, 38, 685– 693.
Amodio, D. M., Harmon-Jones, E., Devine, P. G., Curtin, J. J., Hartley, S.,
& Covert, A. (2004). Neural signals for the detection of unintentional
race bias. Psychological Science, 15, 88 –93.
Aronson, E. (1969). The theory of cognitive dissonance: A current perspective. In L. Berkowitz (Ed.), Advances in experimental social psychology (Vol. 4, pp. 1–34). New York: Academic Press.
Aronson, E. (1999). Dissonance, hypocrisy, and the self concept. In E.
Harmon-Jones & J. Mills (Eds.), Cognitive dissonance: Progress on a
pivotal theory in social psychology (pp. 103–126). Washington, DC:
American Psychological Association.
Baehr, E., Rosenfeld, J. P., & Baehr, R. (2001). Clinical use of an alpha
asymmetry neurofeedback protocol in the treatment of mood disorders:
Follow-up study one to five years post therapy. Journal of Neurotherapy, 4, 11–18.
Baron, R. M., & Kenny, D. (1986). The moderator–mediator variable
distinction in social psychological research: Conceptual, strategic, and
statistical considerations. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
51, 1173–1182.
Beauvois, J. L., & Joule, R. V. (1996). A radical dissonance theory.
London: Taylor & Francis.
Beauvois, J. L., & Joule, R. V. (1999). A radical point of view on
dissonance theory. In E. Harmon-Jones & J. Mills (Eds.), Cognitive
dissonance: Progress on a pivotal theory in social psychology (pp.
43–70). Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
Beckmann, J., & Irle, M. (1985). Dissonance and action control. In J. Kuhl
& J. Beckmann (Eds.), Action control: From cognition to behavior (pp.
129 –150). Berlin, Germany: Springer-Verlag.
Beckmann, J., & Kuhl, J. (1984). Altering information to gain action
control: Functional aspects of human information processing in decision
making. Journal of Research in Personality, 18, 224 –237.
Blom, J. L., & Anneveldt, M. (1982). An electrode cap tested. Electroencephalography and Clinical Neurophysiology, 54, 591–594.
Brehm, J. W. (1956). Postdecision changes in the desirability of alternatives. Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology, 52, 384 –389.
Brehm, J. W., & Cohen, A. R. (1962). Explorations in cognitive dissonance. New York: Wiley.
Cabeza, R., & Nyberg, L. (2000). Imaging cognition II: An empirical
review of 275 PET and fMRI studies. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 12, 1– 47.
Carter, C. S., Braver, T. S., Barch, D. M., Botvinick, M. M., Noll, D., &
Cohen, J. D. (1998, May 1). Anterior cingulate cortex, error detection,
and the online monitoring of performance. Science, 280, 747–749.
Chatrian, G. E., Lettich, E., & Nelson, P. L. (1985). Ten percent electrode
system for topographic studies of spontaneous and evoked EEG activities. American Journal of EEG Technology, 25, 83–92.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

14

HARMON-JONES ET AL.

Coan, J. A., & Allen, J. J. B. (2004). Frontal EEG asymmetry as a
moderator and mediator of emotion. Biological Psychology, 67(1–2),
7–50.
Cook, I. A., O’Hara, R., Uijtdehaage, S. H. J., Mandelkern, M., &
Leuchter, A. F. (1998). Assessing the accuracy of topographic EEG
mapping for determining local brain function. Electroencephalography
and Clinical Neurophysiology, 107, 408 – 414.
Croyle, R. T., & Cooper, J. (1983). Dissonance arousal: Physiological
evidence. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 45, 782–791.
Davidson, R. J., Chapman, J. P., Chapman, L. J., & Henriques, J. B. (1990).
Asymmetrical brain electrical activity discriminates between
psychometrically-matched verbal and spatial cognitive tasks. Psychophysiology, 27, 528 –543.
Elkin, R. A., & Leippe, M. R. (1986). Physiological arousal, dissonance,
and attitude change: Evidence for a dissonance-arousal link and a “don’t
remind me” effect. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 51,
55– 65.
Elliot, A. J., & Devine, P. G. (1994). On the motivation nature of cognitive
dissonance: Dissonance as psychological discomfort. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 67, 382–394.
Festinger, L. (1957). A theory of cognitive dissonance. Stanford, CA:
Stanford University Press.
Festinger, L. (1964). Conflict, decision, and dissonance. Stanford, CA:
Stanford University Press.
Gehring, W. J., Goss, B., Coles, M. G. H., Meyer, D. E., & Donchin, E.
(1993). A neural system for error detection and compensation. Psychological Science, 4, 385–390.
Goldman, R. I., Stern, J. M., Engel, J., Jr., & Cohen, M. S. (2002).
Simultaneous EEG and fMRI of the alpha rhythm. NeuroReport, 13,
2487–2492.
Gollwitzer, P. M. (1990). Action phases and mind-sets. In E. T. Higgins &
R. M. Sorrentino (Eds.), Handbook of motivation and cognition: Foundations of social behavior (Vol. 2, pp. 53–92). New York: Guilford
Press.
Gollwitzer, P. M., & Bayer, U. (1999). Deliberative versus implemental
mindsets in the control of action. In S. Chaiken & Y. Trope (Eds.),
Dual-process theories in social psychology (pp. 403– 422). New York:
Guilford Press.
Hagemann, D., Naumann, E., Becker, G., Maier, S., & Bartussek, D.
(1998). Frontal brain asymmetry and affective style: A conceptual replication. Psychophysiology, 35, 372–388.
Hardman, E., Gruzelier, J., Cheesman, K., Jones, C., Liddiard, D.,
Schleichert, H., & Birbaumer, N. (1997). Frontal interhemispheric asymmetry: Self regulation and individual differences in humans. Neuroscience Letters, 221, 117–120.
Harmon-Jones, E. (1999). Toward an understanding of the motivation
underlying dissonance effects: Is the production of aversive consequences necessary to cause dissonance? In E. Harmon-Jones & J. Mills
(Eds.), Cognitive dissonance: Progress on a pivotal theory in social
psychology (pp. 71–99). Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
Harmon-Jones, E. (2000a). Cognitive dissonance and experienced negative
affect: Evidence that dissonance increases experienced negative affect
even in the absence of aversive consequences. Personality and Social
Psychology Bulletin, 26, 1490 –1501.
Harmon-Jones, E. (2000b). An update on dissonance theory, with a focus
on the self. In A. Tesser, R. Felson, & J. Suls (Eds.), Psychological
perspectives on self and identity (pp. 119 –144). Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
Harmon-Jones, E. (2003). Clarifying the emotive functions of asymmetrical frontal cortical activity. Psychophysiology, 40, 838 – 848.
Harmon-Jones, E. (2004). Contributions from research on anger and cognitive dissonance to understanding the motivational functions of asymmetrical frontal brain activity. Biological Psychology, 67, 51–76.

Harmon-Jones, E., & Allen, J. J. B. (1997). Behavioral activation sensitivity and resting frontal EEG asymmetry: Covariation of putative indicators related to risk for mood disorders. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 106, 159 –163.
Harmon-Jones, E., & Allen, J. J. B. (1998). Anger and prefrontal brain
activity: EEG asymmetry consistent with approach motivation despite
negative affective valence. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 74, 1310 –1316.
Harmon-Jones, E., Brehm, J. W., Greenberg, J., Simon, L., & Nelson, D. E.
(1996). Evidence that the production of aversive consequences is not
necessary to create cognitive dissonance. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 70, 5–16.
Harmon-Jones, E., Gerdjikov, T., & Harmon-Jones, C. (in press). The
effect of induced compliance on relative left frontal cortical activity: A
test of the action-based model of dissonance. European Journal of Social
Psychology.
Harmon-Jones, E., & Harmon-Jones, C. (2002). Testing the action-based
model of cognitive dissonance: The effect of action orientation on
postdecisional attitudes. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 28,
711–723.
Harmon-Jones, E., & Mills, J. (1999). Cognitive dissonance: Progress on
a pivotal theory in social psychology. Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
Harmon-Jones, E., Peterson, H., & Vaughn, K. (2003). The dissonanceinducing effects of an inconsistency between experienced empathy and
knowledge of past failures to help: Support for the action-based model
of dissonance. Basic and Applied Social Psychology, 25, 69 –78.
Harmon-Jones, E., & Sigelman, J. (2001). State anger and prefrontal brain
activity: Evidence that insult-related relative left prefrontal activation is
associated with experienced anger and aggression. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 80, 797– 803.
Harmon-Jones, E., Sigelman, J. D., Bohlig, A., & Harmon-Jones, C.
(2003). Anger, coping, and frontal cortical activity: The effect of coping
potential on anger-induced left frontal activity. Cognition & Emotion,
17, 1–24.
Heckhausen, H. (1986). Why some time out might benefit achievement
motivation research. In J. H. L. van den Bercken, E. E. J. De Bruyn, &
T. C. M. Bergen (Eds.), Achievement and task motivation (pp. 7–39).
Lisse, the Netherlands: Swets & Zeitlinger.
Heller, W., Nitschke, J. B., & Miller, G. A. (1998). Lateralization in
emotion and emotional disorders. Current Directions in Psychological
Science, 7, 26 –32.
Higgins, E. T., Rhodewalt, F., & Zanna, M. P. (1979). Dissonance motivation: Its nature, persistence, and reinstatement. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 15, 16 –34.
Hoshino-Browne, E., Zanna, A. S., Spencer, S. J., Zanna, M. P., Kitayama,
S., & Lackenbauer, S. (2005). On the cultural guises of cognitive
dissonance: The case of Easterners and Westerners. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 89, 294 –310.
Jones, E. E., & Gerard, H. B. (1967). Foundations of social psychology.
New York: Wiley.
Kamiya, J. (1979). Autoregulation of the EEG alpha rhythm: A program
for the study of consciousness. In S. A. E. Peper & M. Quinn (Eds.),
Mind/body integration: Essential readings in biofeedback (pp. 289 –
297). New York: Plenum Press.
Kidd, R. F., & Berkowitz, L. (1976). Effect of dissonance arousal on
helpfulness. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 33, 613–
622.
Knight, R. T., & Grabowecky, M. (1995). Escape from linear time:
Prefrontal cortex and conscious experience. In M. S. Gazzaniga (Ed.),
The cognitive neurosciences (pp. 1357–1371). Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Kotchoubey, B., Kübler, A., Strehl, U., Flor, H., & Birbaumer, N. (2002).

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

ACTION-BASED MODEL OF DISSONANCE
Can humans perceive their brain states? Consciousness and Cognition,
11, 98 –113.
Kuhl, J. (1984). Volitional aspects of achievement motivation and learned
helplessness: Toward a comprehensive theory of action-control. In B. A.
Maher (Ed.), Progress in experimental personality research (Vol. 13,
pp. 99 –171). New York: Academic Press.
Kuhl, J. (2000). A functional-design approach to motivation and selfregulation: The dynamics of personality systems interactions. In M.
Boekaerts, P. R. Pintrich, & M. Zeidner (Eds.), Handbook of selfregulation (pp. 111–169). San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Lawrence, D. H., & Festinger, L. (1962). Deterrents and reinforcement.
Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
Lindsley, D. B., & Wicke, J. D. (1974). The electroencephalogram: Autonomous electrical activity in man and animals. In R. Thompson & N.
Patterson (Eds.), Bioelectric recording techniques (pp. 3–79). New
York: Academic Press.
MacDonald, A. W., III, Cohen, J. D., Stenger, V. A., & Carter, C. S. (2000,
June 9). Dissociating the role of the dorsolateral prefrontal and anterior
cingulate cortex in cognitive control. Science, 288, 1835–1838.
Olson, J. M., & Zanna, M. P. (1979). A new look at selective exposure.
Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 15, 1–15.
Petrides, M., & Milner, B. (1982). Deficits on subject-ordered tasks after
frontal- and temporal-lobe lesions in man. Neuropsychologia, 20, 249 –
262.
Pizzagalli, D., Shackman, A. J., & Davidson, R. J. (2003). The functional
neuroimaging of human emotion: Asymmetric contributions of cortical
and subcortical circuitry. In K. Hugdahl & R. J. Davidson (Eds.), The
asymmetrical brain (pp. 511–532). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Pizzagalli, D. A., Sherwood, R. J., Henriques, J. B., & Davidson, R. J.
(2005). Frontal brain asymmetry and reward responsiveness. A sourcelocalization study. Psychological Science, 16(10), 805– 813.
Rabbie, J. M., Brehm, J. W., & Cohen, A. R. (1959). Verbalization and
reactions to cognitive dissonance. Journal of Personality, 27, 407– 417.
Rhodewalt, F., & Comer, R. (1979). Induced-compliance attitude change:
Once more with feeling. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 15,
35– 47.
Roberts, L. E., Birbaumer, N., Rockstroh, B., Lutzenberger, W., & Elbert,
T. (1989). Self-report during feedback regulation of slow cortical potentials. Psychophysiology, 26, 392– 403.
Robinson, R. G., & Downhill, J. E. (1995). Lateralization of psychopathology in response to focal brain injury. In R. J. Davidson & K.
Hugdahl (Eds.), Brain asymmetry (pp. 693–711). Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Shultz, T. R., Leveille, E., & Lepper, M. R. (1999). Free choice and
cognitive dissonance revisited: Choosing “lesser evils” versus “greater
goods.” Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 25, 40 – 48.
Sigall, H., & Mills, J. (1998). Measures of independent variables and
mediators are useful in social psychology experiments: But are they
necessary? Personality and Social Psychology Review, 2, 218 –226.
Simon, L., Greenberg, J., & Brehm, J. W. (1995). Trivialization: The
forgotten mode of dissonance reduction. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 68, 247–260.
Siniatchkin, M., Kropp, P., & Gerber, W.-D. (2000). Neurofeedback—The
significance of reinforcement and the search for an appropriate strategy
for the success of self-regulation. Applied Psychophysiology and
Biofeedback, 25, 167–175.
Sobotka, S. S., Davidson, R. J., & Senulis, J. A. (1992). Anterior brain

15

electrical asymmetries in response to reward and punishment. Electroencephalography and Clinical Neurophysiology, 83, 236 –247.
Spencer, S. J., Zanna, M. P., & Fong, G. T. (2005). Establishing a causal
chain: Why experiments are often more effective than mediational
analyses in examining psychological processes. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 89, 845– 851.
Steele, C. M. (1988). The psychology of self-affirmation: Sustaining the
integrity of the self. In L. Berkowitz (Ed.), Advances in experimental
social psychology (Vol. 21, pp. 261–302). San Diego, CA: Academic
Press.
Steele, C. M., Southwick, L. L., & Critchlow, B. (1981). Dissonance and
alcohol: Drinking your troubles away. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 41, 831– 846.
Steele, C. M., Spencer, S. J., & Lynch, M. (1993). Self-image resilience
and dissonance: The role of affirmational resources. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 64, 885– 896.
Stone, J., & Cooper, J. (2003). The effect of self-attribute relevance on how
self-esteem moderates attitude change in dissonance processes. Journal
of Experimental Social Psychology, 39, 508 –515.
Stone, J., Wiegand, A. W., Cooper, J., & Aronson, E. (1997). When
exemplification fails: Hypocrisy and the motive for self-integrity. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 72, 54 – 65.
Taylor, S. E., & Brown, J. D. (1988). Illusion and well-being: A social
psychological perspective on mental health. Psychological Bulletin, 103,
193–210.
Taylor, S. E., & Gollwitzer, P. M. (1995). Effects of mindset on positive
illusions. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 69, 213–226.
Tomarken, A. J., & Davidson, R. J. (1994). Frontal brain activation in
repressors and nonrepressors. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 103,
339 –349.
Tomarken, A. J., & Keener, A. D. (1998). Frontal brain asymmetry and
depression: A self-regulatory perspective. Cognition & Emotion, 12,
387– 420.
van Honk, J., & Schutter, D. J. L. G. (2006). From affective valence to
motivational direction: The frontal asymmetry of emotion revised. Psychological Science, 17, 963–965.
van Honk, J., & Schutter, D. J. L. G. (2007). Vigilant and avoidant
responses to angry facial expressions: Dominance and submission motives. In E. Harmon-Jones & P. Winkielman (Eds.), Social neuroscience:
Integrating biological and psychological explanations of social behavior
(pp. 197–223). New York: Guilford Press.
van Veen, V., & Carter, C. S. (2006). Conflict and cognitive control in the
brain. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 15, 237–240.
Wicklund, R. A., & Brehm, J. W. (1976). Perspectives on cognitive
dissonance. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Wicklund, R. A., & Frey, D. (1981). Cognitive consistency: Motivational
vs. nonmotivational perspectives. In J. P. Forgas (Ed.), Social cognition:
Perspectives on everyday understanding (pp. 141– 63). London: Academic Press.
Zanna, M. P., & Cooper, J. (1974). Dissonance and the pill: An attribution
approach to studying the arousal properties of dissonance. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 29, 703–709.

Received September 10, 2006
Revision received July 5, 2007
Accepted July 6, 2007 䡲

