INTERPERSONAL RELATIONS AND GROUP PROCESSES

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

A Social Functional Approach to Emotions in Bargaining: When
Communicating Anger Pays and When It Backfires
Eric van Dijk

Gerben A. van Kleef

Leiden University

University of Amsterdam

Wolfgang Steinel and Ilja van Beest
Leiden University
Previous research on the communication of emotions has suggested that bargainers obtain higher outcomes if
they communicate anger than if they communicate happiness because anger signals higher limits, which in
turn leads opponents to give in. Building on a social functional account of communicated emotions, the
authors demonstrate that the behavioral consequences of communicated anger strongly depend on structural
characteristics of the bargaining situation. The results of 3 experimental studies on ultimatum bargaining
corroborate the notion that communicated anger signals higher limits and that emotion effects are contingent
on bargainers’ expectation that low offers will be rejected. The data also indicate, however, that communicating anger in bargaining may backfire. The findings suggest that bargainers who communicate anger may
obtain lower outcomes (a) when their opponent has a possibility to deceive them during bargaining and (b)
when the consequences of rejecting their opponent’s offer are low. Taken together, the current article reveals
the boundary conditions of successful communication of anger in bargaining.
Keywords: emotions, bargaining, deception, fairness, self-interest

Bargaining can be described as “the process whereby two or
more parties attempt to settle what each shall give and take, or
perform and receive, in a transaction between them” (Rubin &
Brown, 1975, p. 2). Whereas this definition adequately captures
the fact that bargaining is a mixed-motive situation (Komorita &
Parks, 1995; Pruitt & Carnevale, 1993), it may not adequately
capture how bargainers perceive the situation they are in. For one
thing, it does not acknowledge that bargaining is often a highly
emotional and heated process. During bargaining, for example,
bargainers may become angry. How do emotions affect the bargaining process and outcomes? Remarkably, the role of emotions—which seems so central to situations of conflict— has received only limited attention in the bargaining literature. In this
article, we focus on the interpersonal effects of communicated emotions in bargaining. More specifically, we investigate how communicated emotions convey information about one’s limits during bargaining and how these inferences subsequently translate into behavior.

Interpersonal Effects of Emotions
Our research and analysis of emotions in bargaining is rooted in
the social functional analysis of emotions (e.g., Frijda, 1994;
Keltner & Haidt, 1999). In the context of interpersonal effects of
emotions, Keltner and Haidt (1999) highlighted that— especially
in dyadic settings—the communication of emotion conveys crucial
information to receivers about the sender’s beliefs and intentions.
A social functional analysis of emotions in bargaining suggests
that bargainers attend to their opponent’s emotions because this
may provide them with crucial information about what behavior
they might expect of their opponent. Moreover, the social functional account of the informational value of communicated emotions implies that bargainers will take this information as a basis
for their own bargaining behavior if it is functional for them to do
so. Thus, a social functional account of interpersonal effects of
emotions in bargaining assumes that (a) communicated emotions
lead to informational inferences and (b) these informational inferences have behavioral consequences.
Of the interpersonal emotions during bargaining, anger has
received most attention. The basic question that researchers have
addressed is whether anger has disruptive or perhaps positive
effects in bargaining (e.g., Sinaceur & Tiedens, 2006; Van Kleef,
De Dreu, & Manstead, 2004a, 2004b). The results of these studies
provided support for the social functions approach described
above. Van Kleef et al. (2004a, 2004b), for example, compared

Eric van Dijk, Wolfgang Steinel, and Ilja van Beest, Department of
Social and Organizational Psychology, Leiden University, Leiden, the
Netherlands; Gerben A. van Kleef, Department of Social Psychology,
University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Eric van
Dijk, Department of Social and Organizational Psychology, Institute for
Psychological Research, Leiden University, P.O. Box 9555, 2300 RB
Leiden, The Netherlands. E-mail: Dijk@fsw.leidenuniv.nl.

Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 2008, Vol. 94, No. 4, 600 – 614
Copyright 2008 by the American Psychological Association 0022-3514/08/$12.00
DOI: 10.1037/0022-3514.94.4.600

600

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

EMOTIONS IN BARGAINING

how bargainers reacted to an angry opponent and to a happy
opponent. For this purpose, they presented their participants with
a negotiation task in which they could make the first offer. Subsequently, their (simulated) opponent made a preprogrammed
counteroffer, after which participants made a new offer, and the
negotiation process continued. During six rounds of offers and
counteroffers, participants received emotional reactions from their
opponent. These reactions signaled that the opponent was either
angry or happy.
A series of experiments using this paradigm showed that bargainers tended to reciprocate their opponent’s emotions (cf. Keltner & Haidt, 1999; this reciprocal effect was also described in
terms of emotional contagion, cf. Hatfield, Cacioppo, & Rapson,
1994; H. S. Friedman & Riggio, 1981; Hess & Blairy, 2001).
Participants became angry when confronted with an angry opponent and happy when confronted with a happy opponent (see also
R. Friedman et al., 2004). On the basis of these findings, one might
anticipate detrimental effects of communicating anger. Indeed,
previous studies on intrapersonal emotion effects in bargaining
have documented that bargainers may become more competitive
when feeling angry (e.g., Baron, 1990; Forgas, 1998; Pillutla &
Murnighan, 1996). In contrast to this notion, however, the studies
by Van Kleef et al. (2004a, 2004b) did not reveal such detrimental
effects.
The studies did, however, provide support for the social functional account of interpersonal effects of emotions. Supporting the
notion that communicated emotions are used as a basis for informational inferences, the findings indicated that bargainers used
their opponent’s emotion to infer his or her limits. In agreement
with the notion that anger may convey a sense of toughness (e.g.,
Clark, Pataki, & Carver, 1996; Karasawa, 2001; Sinaceur &
Tiedens, 2006), the findings indicated that the limits of angry
opponents were judged to be higher than the limits of happy
opponents. In addition, the studies showed the behavioral consequences of this process by revealing that the participants made
lower demands and higher concessions to an angry opponent than
to a happy opponent. Moreover, the effects of the opponent’s
emotion on the participants’ demands were mediated by the perceived limits of their opponent. This suggests that people give in
to angry opponents because they assume that the limits of angry
opponents are higher. People may then reason that agreement can
only be reached if they concede (see also Frank, 1988).
On the basis of these findings—which basically demonstrate
that showing anger pays— one might conclude that good advice
for any bargainer would be to communicate anger. Because anger
signals high limits, the opponent will concede. We argue, however,
that such a conclusion would be premature and that communicated
anger may also backfire. To understand why, it is important to
separately address the informational consequences and the behavioral consequences of communicating anger. Whereas we do not
dispute that communicating anger may generally convey information of high limits (cf. Clark et al., 1996; Karasawa, 2001; Sinaceur
& Tiedens, 2006; Van Kleef et al., 2004a, 2004b), we do argue that
the behavioral consequences may be more differentiated. Moreover, we suggest that the behavioral consequences strongly depend
on structural aspects of the bargaining situation.
Our basic argument is that communicated anger—and the high
limits it signals—may only lead to lower demands if the structural
aspects of the bargaining situation lead bargainers to infer that

601

conceding to the high limits is the only way to secure outcomes.
We show that structural aspects of the bargaining situation may
provide bargainers with alternative means to further their own
outcomes without necessarily giving in to the opponent’s high
limits. Building on previous insights on structural effects in bargaining, we demonstrate that the behavioral effects of communicated emotions strongly depend on the structural differences between the parties involved in terms of (a) the distribution of
information and (b) the distribution of power. The distribution of
information refers to the knowledge that bargainers have about the
object of the negotiation (e.g., Roth & Malouf, 1979; Samuelson,
1984). The distribution of power refers to the influence that bargainers have on each other’s outcomes, with high influence implying high power (e.g., Emerson, 1972a, 1972b; Lawler, 1992).
In the following, we argue and demonstrate that if the bargaining structure provides bargainers with an information advantage
over their opponent and allows for an exchange of information
other than merely making an offer, communicating anger may
backfire because it may induce bargainers to deceive and misinform their opponent to reduce his or her limits. In addition, we
argue and demonstrate that anger may backfire if it is communicated by someone in a low-power position. Bargainers may decide
not to give in and may even increase their demands when confronted with an angry but low-power opponent.

Distribution of Information and Power in Ultimatum
Bargaining
To examine the structural effects of information and power
distributions, we used a bargaining context that is commonly used
to investigate motivated bargaining behavior. The ultimatum bargaining game was developed by Güth, Schmittberger, and
Schwarze (1982) and basically models the final phase of bargaining, that is, where bargainers make a “take it or leave it” offer to
their opponent. In this game, two players decide how to distribute
a certain amount of money. One of the players, the allocator, offers
a proportion of the money to the other player, the recipient. If the
recipient accepts the offer, the money is distributed in agreement
with the allocator’s offer. If the recipient rejects the offer, both
players get nothing. With its simple structure, the ultimatum bargaining game is very suited to studying motivated bargaining
behavior and the structural effects we address in this article, the
distribution of information and power.
That the distribution of information may strongly affect motivated bargaining behavior has been demonstrated in a series of
studies that were basically designed to test whether bargainers
truly care about fairness. The first experiments on ultimatum
bargaining demonstrated that allocators predominantly offer the
recipient an equal split, so that recipient and allocator end up with
an equal amount of money (for overviews, see, e.g., Camerer &
Thaler, 1995; Güth & Tietz, 1990; Handgraaf, Van Dijk, & De
Cremer, 2003; Thaler, 1988; Van Dijk & Tenbrunsel, 2005).
Initially, this preference for an equal split was interpreted as a
genuine preference for fairness. Subsequent theorizing, however,
posited that allocators may only propose an equal split of the
money because they anticipate that lower offers will be rejected
(e.g., Camerer & Thaler, 1995; Pillutla & Murnighan, 1995; Van
Dijk & Vermunt, 2000; Weg & Zwick, 1994). To study this
possibility, researchers started to manipulate the distribution of

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

602

VAN DIJK, VAN KLEEF, STEINEL, AND VAN BEEST

information. For example, Van Dijk and Vermunt (2000, Experiment 1) designed an ultimatum game in which allocators had to
divide 100 chips that were worth twice as much to the allocator as
to the recipient. In half of the conditions (the symmetric information conditions), the allocators were informed that the recipient
also knew about this differential value. In these conditions, allocators tended to compensate for the differential value by frequently
offering twice as many chips to the recipient as to themselves. In
the other half of the conditions (the asymmetric information conditions), the allocators learned that the recipient did not know
about the differential value. In this case, allocators do not necessarily have to fear that low offers will be rejected. Because the
recipient does not know about the differential value, one can offer
to split the chips equally—a seemingly fair offer—without much
fear of rejection. In agreement with the suggestion that equal offers
that were observed in prior studies on ultimatum bargaining may
have been motivated by fear of rejection of unfair offers, results
indicated that participants made lower offers if they believed the
recipient was not aware of the fact that chips were worth more to
the allocator (for similar findings, see, e.g., Kagel, Kim, & Moser,
1996; Pillutla & Murnighan, 1995; Straub & Murnighan, 1995).
In addition to manipulating information (symmetric vs. asymmetric), other studies manipulated the distribution of power between the allocator and recipient by varying the consequences of
rejection. For example, Suleiman (1996) designed a variant of the
ultimatum bargaining game in which the consequences of rejection
can be varied (see also Van Dijk, De Cremer, & Handgraaf, 2004;
Van Dijk & Tenbrunsel, 2005). In this game, referred to as the
“delta game,” rejection of the offer means that the offer is multiplied with a factor delta (0 ⱕ delta ⱕ 1). Thus, when delta equals
0, the delta game is identical to the standard ultimatum game (i.e.,
if the recipient rejects the offer, the recipient and the allocator both
end up with nothing). It is apparent that with higher values of delta,
the consequences of rejection become less severe and (thus) that
the relative power of the recipient is weakened (see also Van Dijk
& Vermunt, 2000). For example, when delta equals 0.9, rejection
means that the offer is only diminished by 10%, implying that the
recipient is in a low power position relative to the allocator. With
this variant of ultimatum bargaining, Suleiman demonstrated that
as the consequences of rejection are reduced and the power position of the recipient is weakened (i.e., when delta goes up), offers
go down.
What these studies show is that both the distribution of information and the distribution of power strongly affect bargaining
behavior and that the ultimatum bargaining game is highly suited
to investigating the behavioral effects of such structural factors.
More specifically, these studies indicate that these structural aspects of the bargaining situation affect how bargainers may deal
with their opponent’s limits. Bargainers with an information advantage and/or who are facing a low-power opponent may be less
inclined to give in to the (inferred) high limits of an angry opponent. For the current purposes, these insights are of special importance because they imply that the behavioral consequences of
communicating anger may be different from what the current
literature would suggest and that communicating anger may not
always be an effective strategy to increase one’s outcomes in
bargaining.

The Present Studies
We investigated effects of communicated emotions within the
context of ultimatum bargaining by manipulating the distribution
of information (Experiments 1 and 2) and the relative power
position of the bargainers (Experiment 3). In combination, the
results of these three studies are used to distinguish between the
informational and the behavioral consequences of communicated
emotions. Whereas all three studies suggest that people ascribe
higher limits to angry opponents than to happy opponents, they
also show that the behavioral consequences of this informational
inference strongly depend on the structural characteristics of the
bargaining situation. More specifically, Experiment 1 demonstrates that fear of rejection may induce allocators to give in to an
angry recipient, and thus that communicating anger may pay.
Experiment 2 shows that if the bargaining situation allows for
exchange of information, allocators may use deception as a strategic means to actively reduce the angry recipient’s limits. The
results show that under these conditions, communicating anger
backfires. In Experiment 3, we manipulated power by varying the
consequences of rejection. The results show that communicating
anger is detrimental to recipients in a low-power position. Under
these conditions, communicating anger backfires because allocators do not need to fear (inferred) high limits of the angry opponent
when the consequences of rejection are low. Taken together, these
studies shed new light on the functionality of anger communication in bargaining by extending and qualifying previous findings
and theorizing in the realm of the social functional account of
emotions.

Experiment 1: You May Be Angry, But What Do You
Know?
As the starting point for our investigations, we developed an
ultimatum bargaining game along the lines of previous research on
asymmetric information (e.g., Van Dijk & Vermunt, 2000). Concentrating on allocator behavior, participants were assigned the
allocator role and were informed that chips were worth twice as
much to them as to the recipient (cf. Van Dijk & Vermunt, 2000).
Half of the participants learned that the recipient knew about this
differential value (i.e., symmetric information), and the other half
learned that the recipient was unaware of this difference (i.e.,
asymmetric information). Before making their offer, all participants received information about the recipient’s emotion (either
anger or happiness).
It may be noted that in the Van Kleef et al. (2004a, 2004b)
studies, the emotions were expressed in reaction to the offers that
participants made. After receiving the offer, the (simulated) opponents communicated that they were either angry or happy about the
offer, and the main interest was in how this affected subsequent
offers. Such a procedure would not be feasible in ultimatum
bargaining, however, because in ultimatum bargaining allocators
only make one (take it or leave it) offer. Therefore, we adjusted the
procedure by having the participants fill out a general six-item
questionnaire to supposedly assess their general views on bargaining. Their answers were supposedly sent to the recipient, who then
reacted with either anger or happiness. This slight adjustment not
only sufficed to include a meaningful manipulation of emotion in
ultimatum bargaining, it also served to remedy a potential limita-

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

EMOTIONS IN BARGAINING

tion of the emotion manipulation of the Van Kleef et al. studies.
One could argue that in the Van Kleef et al. studies, the manipulation of emotion also constitutes a manipulation of how attractive
the offer is to the opponent. That is, by responding in anger, the
opponent basically states that the offer itself is highly unacceptable. By decoupling the emotion manipulation from the actual
offer, this alternative interpretation seems less viable.
Our first interest was in whether we would replicate the informational and behavioral findings that have been documented in
earlier negotiation research (e.g., Sinaceur & Tiedens, 2006; Van
Kleef, 2004a, 2004b). Would similar effects of emotion be observed in ultimatum bargaining? And would they be as evident in
the case of symmetric information as in the case of asymmetric
information? We anticipated two possibilities. The first possibility
was that we would indeed find a similar effect such that participants make higher offers to angry opponents than to happy opponents. If the behavioral effects of communicated anger or happiness are primarily based on the informational effects of
communicated emotions on the perceived limits (i.e., angry opponents are expected to have higher limits than happy opponents), we
should find two main effects. To make the offer acceptable, angry
opponents should be offered more chips than happy opponents,
and opponents should be offered more chips in the symmetric
information conditions than in the asymmetric information conditions (Kagel et al., 1996; Pillutla & Murnighan, 1995; Straub &
Murnighan, 1995; Van Dijk & Vermunt, 2000). An alternative
possibility would be that participants in the asymmetric information condition might be reluctant to take advantage of their information advantage when confronted with a happy opponent. In that
case, in the symmetric information conditions participants would
offer more chips to the angry opponent than to the happy opponent,
replicating the findings of Van Kleef et al. (2004a), whereas in the
asymmetric information conditions participants would offer more
chips to the happy opponent than to the angry opponent.

Method
Design and Participants
The study used a 2 (emotions: angry vs. happy) ⫻ 2 (information: symmetric vs. asymmetric) between-participants factorial
design. The participants, 114 students (42 men and 72 women) at
Leiden University (mean age ⫽ 20.1 years), participated voluntarily.

603

answering these questions that participants learned that their answers would be sent to the person that they would bargain with.
The fact that answers were sent to the opponent was explained by
pointing out that in reality people often have some information
about the other party.
Participants then received the explanation of the ultimatum
bargaining situation. All participants learned that they, X, would
bargain with Y over the distribution of 100 chips; 1 chip was said
to be worth .10 Euro to the allocator (person X) and .05 Euro to the
recipient (person Y; 1 Euro equaled $1.20 at the time of the
experiment). In all conditions, participants learned that they could
make an offer for the distribution of the chips to the recipient. If
the recipient accepted the offer, the chips would be divided accordingly. If the recipient rejected the offer, neither the recipient
nor the allocator would receive any chips.
In the asymmetric information conditions, participants were
informed that the recipient did not know about the differential
value and that only he or she knew that that chips were worth .05
Euro to the recipient. In the symmetric information conditions,
participants learned that the recipient did know about the differential value of the chips.
After explaining the bargaining situation, the manipulation of
the recipient’s emotion was induced. Participants learned that the
recipient had typed a reaction after reading the participant’s six
answers to the bargaining statements. It was stressed that when the
recipient typed the reaction, the recipient did not think that the
typed reaction would be sent back to the participant (cf. Van Kleef
et al., 2004a). This was done to ensure that the participants trusted
that the typed emotion was genuine (rather than being a strategic
message). In the angry recipient conditions, participants read, “I’ve
read what X typed and I must say that I do get angry about it!!” In
the happy recipient conditions, participants read, “I’ve read what X
typed and I must say that it makes me happy!!”
Subsequently, participants made their offer to the recipient. In
addition, we performed some manipulation checks and assessed
the emotions (anger and happiness) that participants ascribed to the
recipients and to themselves. Furthermore, we assessed the limits
that participants ascribed to their opponent by asking them the
minimum number of chips the recipient would need to accept their
offer, and we asked them how likely it would be that the recipient
would accept their offer. At the end of the experiment, participants
were thoroughly debriefed and paid 6 Euro. All participants agreed
to this procedure.

Results
Procedure

Manipulation Checks

At the start of the instructions, the participants were informed
that they would participate in a study on bargaining and that they
were paired with one of the other participants. Members of each
dyad would be referred to as persons X and Y. All participants
learned that they were assigned the letter X.
After this, participants were informed that before the bargaining
would start, they should answer some questions about how they
viewed bargaining. For this purpose, participants were presented
with six general statements, and they had to indicate on a 5-point
scale to what extent they agreed or disagreed with the statements.
Example statements are “Strategy is important in negotiations” and
“In negotiations I quickly try to reach agreement.” It was only after

Recipient’s emotion. To check the manipulation of recipient’s
emotion, two questions were posed about the perceived emotion of
the recipient (cf. Van Kleef et al., 2004a). We asked participants to
what extent the recipient was angry (1 ⫽ not angry and 7 ⫽ very
angry) and to what extent the recipient was happy (1 ⫽ not happy
and 7 ⫽ very happy). A 2 (recipient’s emotion) ⫻ 2 (information)
analysis of variance (ANOVA) on the anger ratings yielded a main
effect only for emotion, F(1, 110) ⫽ 519.61, p ⬍ .0001, ␩2 ⫽ .83,
indicating that participants in the angry recipient conditions judged
the recipients to be more angry (M ⫽ 5.81, SD ⫽ 1.37) than did
participants in the happy recipient conditions (M ⫽ 1.30, SD ⫽
0.57).

604

VAN DIJK, VAN KLEEF, STEINEL, AND VAN BEEST

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

A 2 ⫻ 2 ANOVA on the perceived happiness ratings yielded a
main effect only for recipient’s emotion, F(1, 110) ⫽ 513.72, p ⬍
.0001, ␩2 ⫽ .82, indicating that participants in the angry recipient
conditions judged the recipients as being less happy (M ⫽ 1.88,
SD ⫽ 0.97) than did participants in the happy recipient conditions
(M ⫽ 6.00, SD ⫽ 0.96).
Information. To check our manipulation of information, we
asked our participants whether their opponent knew that chips
were worth twice as much to X than to Y (1 ⫽ yes and 2 ⫽ no, Y
only knows the value of chips to Y). All participants answered this
question correctly.
These findings suggest that our manipulations of recipient’s
emotion and information were successful.

As our ANOVA findings for the offer already showed, the first
condition was met by showing main effects for information and
emotion (for information, ␤ ⫽ ⫺0.37, p ⬍ .0001; for emotion, ␤ ⫽
⫺0.23, p ⬍ .01; R2 ⫽ .19). The two main effects on the recipient’s
perceived limit show that the second condition was also satisfied
(for information, ␤ ⫽ ⫺.0.48, p ⬍ .0001; for emotion, ␤ ⫽ ⫺0.28,
p ⬍ .001; R2 ⫽ .32). Finally, the results of our regression analyses
showed that after inclusion of the recipient’s perceived limit, the
effect of recipient’s perceived limit was highly significant (␤ ⫽
0.36, p ⫽ .001), whereas the effect of emotion became nonsignificant (␤ ⫽ ⫺0.13, p ⫽ .14.) and the effect of information was
reduced to ⫺0.20 ( p ⫽ .04; R2 ⫽ .28). Sobel tests indicated that
the reduction was significant for information (Z ⫽ ⫺3.12, p ⬍ .01)
and for recipient’s emotion (Z ⫽ ⫺2.53, p ⫽ .01).

Number of Chips Offered to the Recipient
A 2 (recipient’s emotion) ⫻ 2 (information) ANOVA yielded
main effects for recipient’s emotion, F(1, 110) ⫽ 6.86, p ⬍ .01,
␩2 ⫽ .06, and information, F(1, 110) ⫽ 18.43, p ⬍ .0001, ␩2 ⫽
.14. The emotion main effect indicated that the participants offered
more chips to the angry recipient (M ⫽ 57.65, SD ⫽ 8.13) than to
the happy recipient (M ⫽ 53.67, SD ⫽ 9.76). The main effect of
information indicated that the participants offered more chips to the
recipient in the symmetric information conditions (M ⫽ 58.98, SD ⫽
8.44) than in the asymmetric information conditions (M ⫽ 52.33,
SD ⫽ 8.70). No interaction was observed, F(1, 110) ⫽ 0.88, ns.

Recipient’s Perceived Limit
To assess the perceived limit of the recipient, we asked the
participants how many chips they expected the recipient should be
offered for the recipient to accept the offer. A 2 (recipient’s
emotion) ⫻ 2 (information) ANOVA on this measure yielded main
effects only for recipient’s emotion, F(1, 110) ⫽ 12.54, p ⬍ .001,
␩2 ⫽ .10, and information, F(1, 110) ⫽ 37.65, p ⬍ .0001, ␩2 ⫽
.26. The recipient’s emotion main effect indicated that the participants expected a higher limit from the angry recipient (M ⫽
57.02, SD ⫽ 8.97) than from the happy recipient (M ⫽ 50.72,
SD ⫽ 13.21). The information main effect indicated that the
perceived limits were higher in the symmetric information conditions (M ⫽ 59.44, SD ⫽ 11.84) than in the asymmetric information
conditions (M ⫽ 48.30, SD ⫽ 8.46).

Mediation Analysis
Our social functional account assumes that other’s emotions
affect bargaining behavior because of their influence on the perception of the other’s limits. In agreement with this notion, we
observed a significant correlation between offers and the recipient’s perceived limit (r ⫽ .47, p ⬍ .0001). To assess whether
perceived limits mediated the reported effects of the recipient’s
emotion on the ultimatum offers, we performed a series of regressions (cf. Baron & Kenny, 1986). For mediation, three conditions
must be satisfied. First, the independent variables (recipient’s
emotion and information) should significantly affect the dependent
variable (offer). Second, the independent variables should significantly affect the proposed mediator (perceived recipient’s limit).
Third, to establish full mediation, the effects of the independent
variables on the dependent variable should become nonsignificant
after controlling for the mediator.

Additional Measures
Participant’s emotions. As noted in the introduction, previous
research on the interpersonal effects of emotions has documented
that bargainers may reciprocate their opponent’s emotion. To
check whether a similar process also occurred in the current
setting, we asked participants whether they felt angry or happy. A
2 ⫻ 2 ANOVA on the anger ratings yielded a main effect only for
recipient’s emotion, F(1, 110) ⫽ 65.59, p ⬍ .0001, ␩2 ⫽ .37,
indicating that participants in the angry recipient conditions reported being more angry (M ⫽ 2.96, SD ⫽ 1.69) than did participants in the happy recipient conditions (M ⫽ 1.11, SD ⫽ 0.31). A
2 ⫻ 2 ANOVA on the happiness ratings yielded a main effect only
for recipient’s emotion, F(1, 110) ⫽ 128.03, p ⬍ .0001, ␩2 ⫽ .54,
indicating that participants in the angry recipient conditions reported being less happy (M ⫽ 2.82, SD ⫽ 1.14) than did participants in the happy recipient conditions (M ⫽ 5.49, SD ⫽ 1.14).
Taken together, these data support the notion of reciprocated
emotions.
Likelihood that the recipient will accept the offer. After participants had made their offer, we asked them how likely it was
that the recipient would accept their offer (1 ⫽ very unlikely and
7 ⫽ very likely). A 2 ⫻ 2 ANOVA indicated no significant effects
(M ⫽ 5.18, SD ⫽ 1.31), suggesting that participants in all conditions were equally motivated to make an offer that would be
acceptable to the recipient. We discuss the implications of this
finding in more detail in the General Discussion when we compare
this finding to the different pattern that emerged in Experiment 3.

Discussion
The results of Experiment 1 show that the manipulation of the
distribution of information and of communicated emotion independently affected the offers. The findings regarding the distribution of information corroborate previous research on the effects of
asymmetric information in ultimatum bargaining by showing that
offers go down when allocators have an information advantage
(e.g., Boles, Croson, & Murnighan, 2000; Kagel et al., 1996;
Pillutla & Murnighan, 1995; Roth & Malouf, 1979; Roth & Murnighan, 1982; Straub & Murnighan, 1995).
For the current purposes, the more interesting finding concerns
the effect of the other’s emotion on offers. In this respect, our
findings corroborated the basic reasoning of Van Kleef et al.
(2004a, 2004b) by showing that it pays to be angry in bargaining:

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

EMOTIONS IN BARGAINING

Participants made higher offers to an angry recipient than to a
happy recipient. Thus, even though bargainers seemed to reciprocate their opponent’s emotion in the sense that participants were
more angry (and less happy) when confronted with an angry
recipient, their anger did not translate into lower offers. In agreement with the social functional account of emotions, the results of
the mediation analysis suggested that the process by which communicated emotions affected bargaining at least partly runs via
perceived limits. Bargainers ascribed higher limits to angry opponents and accommodated to these higher limits by offering them a
better deal. It thus appeared that our current manipulation of
emotion had effects similar to the emotion manipulation used by
Van Kleef et al. (2004a, 2004b).
Note that giving in to an angry opponent was also observed in
the asymmetric information conditions and that we thus found a
main effect of recipient’s emotion on offers. The data on the
perceived limits and the mediation analysis show why: As in the
symmetric information conditions, participants in the asymmetric
information conditions expected higher limits from the angry
recipient. From this, we may conclude that participants still feared
that low offers were more likely to be rejected by angry opponents
than by happy opponents. Note, however, that an information
advantage may also offer other opportunities: It may offer the
opportunity to misinform others, for example by stating that chips
are worth less to you than they actually are. Experiment 1 did not
allow for this opportunity, as participants were only allowed to
make an offer. But what if allocators had the opportunity to
misinform the recipient?

605

Euro to the allocator? Would they be more likely to misinform the
angry opponent, that is, the opponent with the highest apparent
limits? And how would this affect their subsequent offers?
On the basis of the notion that the effects of communicated
anger run via perceived limits (Van Kleef et al., 2004a, 2004b), we
expected that participants in the asymmetric information conditions would be especially likely to deceive the angry opponent
because deception offers the possibility to reduce the opponent’s
limits. In previous research, Steinel and De Dreu (2004) have
shown that people may be more likely to deceive others when they
fear exploitation by these others, for instance, if they expect that
their opponent is competitive (see also Pruitt & Kimmel, 1977;
Rubin, Pruitt, & Kim, 1994). In a similar vein, we expected people
to be more likely to resort to deception if they anticipate that their
opponent may have high limits. To assess whether people use
deception to lower their opponent’s limits, we also assessed what
limits the participants expected from their opponent after the
information exchange. With regard to the offers, we anticipated
that with the opportunity for deception, participants in the asymmetric information conditions would subsequently make lower
offers to the angry recipient than to the happy recipient. After all,
if participants would indeed be more deceitful toward the angry
recipient to lower the recipient’s limits, they could subsequently
make the recipient lower offers without having to fear that these
would be rejected.

Method
Design and Participants

Experiment 2: So You’re Angry? Well, Let Me Tell You
Something. . .
In Experiment 2, we replicated the basic design of Experiment
1, such that participants were confronted with either an angry
recipient or a happy recipient. Also as in Experiment 1, chips were
worth twice as much to the allocator as to the recipient, and
information was manipulated as in Experiment 1. The main difference
was that we changed the structure of the bargaining situation. We now
allowed for additional communication by asking the participants to
send a message to the recipient before making their offer. They could
either (correctly) inform the recipient that chips were worth .10 Euro
to the allocator or (incorrectly) inform the recipient that chips were
worth .05 Euro to the allocator. With this added opportunity, participants could now actively deceive the recipient.
Lewicki and Stark (1996, p. 78) defined deception as an activity
that “manipulates the opponent’s logical and inferential processes,
in order to lead the opponent to an incorrect conclusion or deduction.” On the basis of our social functional account of interpersonal
emotions and the apparent importance of the perceived limits for
the offers, we reasoned that in this bargaining context deception
would be used to affect the recipient’s limits. Of course, this added
opportunity for information exchange should not have a strong
impact on allocations in the symmetric information conditions
because there it would seem unlikely that participants would send
incorrect information knowing that the recipient was fully aware of
the value difference. Our main interest was in how participants in
the asymmetric information condition would react. Would they
actively misinform the recipient to lower his or her limits by
incorrectly informing the recipient that chips were only worth .05

The study used a 2 (recipient’s emotion: angry vs. happy) ⫻ 2
(information: symmetric vs. asymmetric) between-participants factorial design. The participants, 106 students at Leiden University
(23 men and 83 women; mean age ⫽ 20.2 years), participated
voluntarily.

Procedure
The procedure was identical to that of Experiment 1, with one
notable exception. After the manipulation of the recipient’s emotion (angry vs. happy) and information (symmetric vs. asymmetric) but before making their offer, participants were informed that
they could send a brief message to Y. The rationale that we offered
was that in reality there is often some kind of communication in
bargaining. Participants were asked to indicate to the recipient how
much they would receive for each chip. They could either inform
Y that they received .05 Euro or that they received .10 Euro. (Note
that a message of .10 Euro would be correct and that a message of
.05 Euro would be incorrect.) After participants had sent the
information, we assessed the importance of the fear of rejection
motive by asking them to what extent it had been important to
them when sending the information to avoid the recipient’s rejecting their offer (1 ⫽ not important and 7 ⫽ very important). After
this, participants were asked to indicate their offer. The dependent
measures were similar to the measures of Experiment 1. In addition,
we now assessed the importance of the fear of rejection motive by
asking them to what extent it had been important for them—when
making the offer—that they wanted to avoid that the recipient would
reject their offer (1 ⫽ not important, 7 ⫽ very important).

VAN DIJK, VAN KLEEF, STEINEL, AND VAN BEEST

606

At the end of the experiment, participants were thoroughly
debriefed and paid 6 Euro. All participants agreed to this procedure.

Table 1
Number of Chips Offered to the Recipient as a Function of
Information and Recipient’s Emotion: Experiment 2
Angry

Results

Happy

Condition

M

SD

M

SD

Symmetric
Asymmetric

62.04
49.96

8.95
9.61

56.50
57.58

6.27
12.56

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Manipulation Checks
Recipient’s emotion. As in Experiment 1, we checked the
manipulation of recipient’s emotion by asking the participants to
what extent the recipient was angry and to what extent the recipient was happy. A 2 (recipient’s emotion) ⫻ 2 (information)
ANOVA on the anger ratings yielded a main effect only for
recipient’s emotion, F(1, 102) ⫽ 547.31, p ⬍ .0001, ␩2 ⫽ .84,
indicating that participants in the angry recipient conditions judged
the recipients as more angry (M ⫽ 6.04, SD ⫽ 1.23) than did
participants in the happy recipient conditions (M ⫽ 1.48, SD ⫽
0.67).
A 2 ⫻ 2 ANOVA on the perceived happiness ratings yielded a
main effect only for recipient’s emotion, F(1, 102) ⫽ 530.86, p ⬍
.0001, ␩2 ⫽ .84, indicating that participants in the angry recipient
conditions judged the recipients as less happy (M ⫽ 1.57, SD ⫽
0.86) than did participants in the happy recipient conditions (M ⫽
5.90, SD ⫽ 1.05).
Information. To check our manipulation of information, we
asked our participants whether before the sending of the information, their opponent knew that chips were worth twice as much to
X than to Y (1 ⫽ yes and 2 ⫽ no, Y only knew the value of chips
to Y). All participants answered this question correctly.

Information Sent to the Recipient
Participants could either correctly inform the recipient that chips
were worth .10 Euro to them or incorrectly inform them that chips
were worth .05 Euro. Not surprisingly, all participants in the
symmetric information conditions correctly informed the recipient
that chips were worth .10 Euro. Of course, we were primarily
interested in the information participants sent in the asymmetric
information condition. Interestingly, and in agreement with our
predictions, the data indicated that participants more often sent
incorrect information to the angry recipient (17 out of 26: 65.4 %)
than to the happy recipient (9 out of 26: 34.6%); ␹2(1, N ⫽ 106) ⫽
4.92, p ⬍ .04.

Number of Chips Offered to the Recipient
After sending the information to the recipient, participants made
their offers. A 2 (recipient’s emotion) ⫻ 2 (information) ANOVA
on the offers yielded a main effect of information, F(1, 102) ⫽
12.43, p ⬍ .001, ␩2 ⫽ .11, and a significant Recipient’s Emotion ⫻ Information interaction, F(1, 102) ⫽ 8.69, p ⬍ .001, ␩2 ⫽
.08. The information main effect indicated that the participants
offered more chips to the recipient in the symmetric information
conditions (M ⫽ 59.89, SD ⫽ 10.87) than in the asymmetric
information conditions (M ⫽ 52.23, SD ⫽ 8.68). The interaction
effect corroborated our reasoning. Table 1 shows that in the
symmetric conditions, participants offered more chips to the angry
recipient than to the happy recipient, F(1, 102) ⫽ 2.91, p ⫽ .09. In
the asymmetric conditions, the reverse pattern was observed: Par-

ticipants offered fewer chips to the angry recipient than to the
happy recipient, F(1, 102) ⫽ 5.43, p ⬍ .05.

Recipient’s Perceived Limit
As in Experiment 1, we assessed the perceived limit of the
recipient. After participants had sent the information to the recipient and subsequently made their offer, we asked them how many
chips they expected the recipient should be offered for the recipient to accept the offer. A 2 (recipient’s emotion) ⫻ 2 (information) ANOVA on this number yielded an information main effect,
F(1, 102) ⫽ 10.55, p ⬍ .01, ␩2 ⫽ .09, indicating that the perceived
limit was higher in the symmetric information conditions (M ⫽
59.02, SD ⫽ 13.78) than in the asymmetric information conditions
(M ⫽ 51.40, SD ⫽ 10.39). More important for the current purposes, the main effect of information was qualified by a significant
Recipient’s Emotion ⫻ Information interaction, F(1, 102) ⫽ 8.19,
p ⬍ .01, ␩2 ⫽ .07. As Table 2 shows, in the asymmetric information condition, participants ascribed a lower limit to the angry
recipient than to the happy recipient, F(1, 102) ⫽ 8.95, p ⬍ .01.
This finding of low perceived limits for the angry recipient in
the asymmetric information conditions stands in sharp contrast to
the finding of Experiment 1 and the general notion that people
infer that angry opponents set higher limits. It is, however, congruent with the notion that the participants more often deceived the
angry opponent by letting the recipient believe that chips were
only worth .05 Euro to the allocator. As we reasoned, the likely
primary goal of deceiving the recipient would be to lower his or
her limits. To further explore the instrumentality of deception for
lowering the limits, we performed a post hoc analysis on the
perceived limit in the asymmetric information conditions, using
the information that participants sent (correct vs. incorrect) as a
post hoc factor. A 2 (information sent) ⫻ 2 (recipient’s emotion)
ANOVA on the perceived limit yielded a main effect only for
information sent, F(1, 48) ⫽ 19.89, p ⬍ .0001, ␩2 ⫽ .29. After
sending the information, participants who sent incorrect information indeed estimated the recipient’s limit to be lower (M ⫽ 45.69,
SD ⫽ 8.53) than did participants who sent correct information
(M ⫽ 57.12, SD ⫽ 8.92), which is in agreement with the view that
the purpose of sending incorrect information is to lower the recipient’s limit.

Mediation Analysis
As in Experiment 1, we observed a significant correlation between offers and the perceived limit of the recipient (r ⫽ .66, p ⬍
.0001). To assess whether perceived limits mediated the effects of
our manipulations on the ultimatum offers, we again performed a

EMOTIONS IN BARGAINING

Table 2
Perceived Limits of the Recipient as a Function of Information
and Recipient’s Emotion: Experiment 2

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Angry

Happy

Condition

M

SD

M

SD

Symmetric
Asymmetric

63.71
49.73

8.94
12.21

53.96
53.08

8.09
16.27

series of regressions to test for mediation. We tested (a) whether the
independent variables (recipient’s emotion and information) significantly affected the offer, (b) whether the independent variables significantly affected the perceived recipient’s limit, and (c) whether the
effects of the independent variables on the offer became nonsignificant after controlling for the recipient’s perceived limit.
All three conditions were satisfied. As our ANOVA findings on
the offer showed, the first condition was met by showing significant effects of information and the Information ⫻ Recipient’s
Emotion interaction (for information, ␤ ⫽ 0.32, p ⬍ .001; for the
interaction, ␤ ⫽ ⫺0.27, p ⬍ .01; R2 ⫽ .18). The effects of
information and the Information ⫻ Recipient’s Emotion interaction on the perceived limits show that the second condition was
also satisfied (for information, ␤ ⫽ 0.29, p ⬍ .01; for the interaction, ␤ ⫽ ⫺0.26, p ⬍ .005; R2 ⫽ .17). Finally, the regression
analyses showed that after inclusion of the perceived limits, the
effect of perceived limits was highly significant (␤ ⫽ 0.60, p ⫽
.0001), whereas the effects of information and the interaction
became nonsignificant (for information, ␤ ⫽ 0.14, p ⫽ .07; for the
interaction, ␤ ⫽ ⫺0.11, p ⫽ .15; R2 ⫽ .47). Sobel tests indicated
that the reduction was significant for information (Z ⫽ 2.98, p ⬍
.001) and for the interaction (Z ⫽ ⫺2.67, p ⬍ .01).

Fear of Rejection
The participants made two decisions in which fear of rejection
might play an important role: the sending of the information and
the making of their subsequent offer. After each of these decisions,
we assessed the importance of the fear of rejection motive for that
decision. By treating these two measures as the two levels of a
within-participants factor decision, we were able to assess the
relative importance of the fear of rejection motive for both decisions. A 2 (recipient’s emotion) ⫻ 2 (information) ⫻ 2 (decision:
sending information vs. making offer) ANOVA with repeated
measures on the last factor yielded only a highly significant
three-way interaction, F(1, 102) ⫽ 17.92, p ⬍ .0001, ␩2 ⫽ .29.
The relevant cell means for the three-way interaction are presented in Table 3. To interpret this interaction, we first take a look
at the data regarding the sending of information. It is important to
acknowledge that the data regarding the sending of information in
the symmetric information condition constitute a special case
because all participants in this condition (understandably) sent
correct information to the recipient. The scores in these conditions
may therefore primarily reflect that participants reasoned that
sending incorrect information would probably have been met
negatively (which might result in rejection of their subsequent
offer). More relevant are the data regarding the sending of information in the asymmetric information conditions. Table 3 shows

607

that in these conditions the motive was more important for participants facing the angry recipient (M ⫽ 5.77, SD ⫽ 1.11) than for
participants facing the happy recipient (M ⫽ 4.77, SD ⫽ 1.48),
F(1, 102) ⫽ 4.53, p ⬍ .05, which fits with the notion that people
especially fear that angry recipients are likely to reject.
It is interesting to see, however, that the pattern drastically
changes once participants have sent the information. As the data on
the importance of the fear of rejection motive when making the
offer show, participants in the asymmetric information conditions
did not seem to be that occupied with the possibility that the
recipient might reject their offer. To the contrary, the fear of
rejection motive even tended to be less important for participants
facing the angry recipient (M ⫽ 4.42, SD ⫽ 1.90) than for
participants facing the happy recipient (M ⫽ 5.08, SD ⫽ 1.44),
F(1, 102) ⫽ 4.53, p ⫽ .04. This finding can easily be understood
if one realizes that participants apparently deduced that after
sending incorrect information there was no longer a need to
anticipate that the angry (but deceived) recipient would reject the
offer. The fact that the importance of the fear of rejection motive
for making the offer was considered to be higher by participants
facing an angry recipient in the symmetric condition (M ⫽ 5.36,
SD ⫽ 1.55) than by participants facing an angry recipient in the
asymmetric condition (M ⫽ 4.42, SD ⫽ 1.90), F(1, 102) ⫽ 3.87,
p ⫽ .05, corroborates this interpretation.

Additional Measures
Participant’s emotions. As in Experiment 1, we asked participants whether they felt angry or happy. A 2 (recipient’s emotion) ⫻ 2 (information) ANOVA on the anger ratings yielded a
main effect only for recipient’s emotion, F(1, 102) ⫽ 47.72, p ⬍
.0001, ␩2 ⫽ .32, indicating that participants in the angry recipient
conditions reported being more angry (M ⫽ 2.98, SD ⫽ 1.61) than
did participants in the happy recipient conditions (M ⫽ 1.33, SD ⫽
0.68). A 2 ⫻ 2 ANOVA on the happiness ratings yielded only a
main effect of recipient’s emotion, F(1, 102) ⫽ 101.44, p ⬍ .0001,
␩2 ⫽ .50, indicating that participants in the angry recipient conditions reported being less happy (M ⫽ 3.06, SD ⫽ 1.41) than did
participants in the happy recipient conditions (M ⫽ 5.63, SD ⫽
1.22). Taken together, these data support the notion that bargainers
reciprocate their opponent’s emotions.
Likelihood that the recipient will accept the offer. As in Experiment 1, we asked participants after they had made their offer

Table 3
Importance of the Fear of Rejection Motive When Sending
Information and When Making an Offer, as a Function of
Information and Recipient’s Emotion: Experiment 2
Symmetric
information
Decision
Sending information
M
SD
Making offer
M
SD

Asymmetric
information

Angry

Happy

Angry

Happy

4.93
2.00

5.12
2.01

5.77
1.11

4.77
1.48

5.36
1.55

4.58
2.08

4.42
1.90

5.08
1.44

VAN DIJK, VAN KLEEF, STEINEL, AND VAN BEEST

608

how likely it would be that the recipient would accept it (1 ⫽ very
unlikely and 7 ⫽ very likely). A 2 (recipient’s emotion) ⫻ 2
(information) ANOVA indicated no significant effects (M ⫽ 5.23,
SD ⫽ 1.40), suggesting that participants in all conditions were
equally motivated to make an offer that would be acceptable to the
recipient. This finding, which corresponds to the findings we
obtained in Experiment 1, is discussed in more detail in the
General Discussion when comparing it to the different pattern we
obtained in Experiment 3.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Discussion
The findings provide strong support for our reasoning that (a)
emotion effects are contingent on their effect on the perceived
limits and fear of rejection and (b) when fear of rejection is
removed, communicating anger may backfire in the sense that
angry bargainers may end up with lower outcomes. In addition to
evidence suggesting that bargainers reciprocated their opponent’s
emotions, the behavioral data showed that our participants were
more deceptive toward angry bargainers. Fear of rejection appears
to play a central role here. By deceiving the angry opponent,
people may lower the limits of their opponent, which “allows”
them to make low offers without having to fear the consequences.
Conversely, by truthfully informing the happy opponent about the
value difference, bargainers put themselves in a situation that calls
for compensation. This is not to say that the communicated emotion affects the interest that people have in making an offer that
would be accepted by their opponent. As our data show, in the end
participants in all conditions seemed equally convinced that the
recipient would accept their offer.

may thus become less essential in the bargaining process. Simply
put, when the consequences of rejection are low, bargainers may
reason that the communication of high limits via communicated
anger is not worrying at all: Why should I even care about your
limits if the consequences of your rejection of my offer are low?
This also means that bargainers should be less focused on having
their offers accepted, and thus that in contrast to Experiments 1 and
2, we should now find effects on the perceived acceptability of the
offers.
In Experiment 3, we thus manipulated the consequences of
rejection by manipulating delta, and again manipulated the communicated emotions of the recipient. Our main interest was to see
whether, if the consequences of rejection were low, participants
would make lower offers to the angry recipient than to the happy
recipient. Because fear of rejection and perceived limits have
played an important role in our reasoning thus far, we also measured these constructs.

Method
Design and Participants
The study used a 2 (recipient’s emotion: angry vs. happy) ⫻ 2
(consequences of rejection: low vs. high) between-participants
factorial design. The participants, 103 students at Leiden University (22 men and 81 women; mean age ⫽ 20.8 years), participated
voluntarily.

Procedure
Experiment 3: So You’re Angry, and You May Reject?
Big Deal
The results of Experiment 2 suggest that the participants strived
to get their offers accepted and that in their “getting to yes” (cf.
Fisher & Ury, 1981), they strategically tried to lower the limits of
especially the angry opponent. It thus seems that in the pursuit of
getting one’s offer accepted, people may turn to deception when
confronted with anger.
The recipient’s impact in the ultimatum game pertains to what
would happen if he or she rejected the allocator’s offers. As we
noted, in the typical ultimatum bargaining study, the consequences
of rejection of the offer are high because rejection leaves the
allocator empty handed. In such a setting, allocators may (rightfully) fear the consequences of having their offer rejected. But
what would happen if the consequences of the recipient’s rejection
of the offer are less severe? What if outcomes can be secured even
when hearing a “no?”
As we mentioned in the introduction, it is possible to manipulate
the relative power position of allocator and recipient in the ultimatum bargaining context by varying the consequences of rejection. In the delta bargaining game, rejection of the offer means that
the offer is multiplied with a factor delta (0 ⱕ delta ⱕ 1). With
higher values of delta, the consequences of rejection become less
severe (Suleiman, 1996; Van Dijk et al., 2004). An interesting
implication is that when the consequences of rejection are low, one
no longer has to fear an angry recipient’s reaction. Whereas it may
still be true that anger communicates higher limits, the limit itself

The procedure resembled the procedures of Experiments 1 and
2, including the manipulation of recipient’s emotion (angry vs.
happy). After this manipulation, all participants learned that they,
X, would bargain with Y over the distribution of 100 chips; 1 chip
was said to be worth .05 Euro. In all conditions, participants
learned that they would make an offer to Y by indicating how they
wanted the 100 chips to be allocated. If Y agreed to the division,
the chips would be distributed accordingly. In the highconsequences conditions, participants learned that if the recipient
turned down the division, both X and Y would not receive any
money (i.e., no chips would be divided). In the low-consequences
conditions, participants learned that if the recipient turned down
the division, the division would be reduced by 10%.1
Subsequently, participants made their offer to the recipient. In
addition to the manipulation checks and the measurement of the
participant’s emotion, we also assessed the limits that participants
ascribed to the recipient, the likelihood that the recipient would
accept their offer, and how important it had been for them that the
recipient could reject their offer. At the end of the experiment,
participants were thoroughly debriefed and paid 6 Euro. All participants agreed to this procedure.
1

In terms of the formal description of the delta game (Suleiman, 1996;
Van Dijk et al., 2004), this means that in the high-consequences conditions,
delta was set at 0, and that in the low consequences conditions, delta was
set at 0.9.

EMOTIONS IN BARGAINING

Results

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Manipulation Checks
To check the manipulation of recipient’s emotion, two questions
were posed about the recipient’s perceived emotion. We asked
participants to what extent the recipient was angry and to what
extent the recipient was happy. A 2 (recipient’s emotion) ⫻ 2
(consequences of rejection) ANOVA on the anger ratings yielded
a main effect only for recipient’s emotion, F(1, 99) ⫽ 646.90, p ⬍
.0001, ␩2 ⫽ .87, indicating that participants in the angry recipient
conditions judged the recipients as being more angry (M ⫽ 5.92,
SD ⫽ 1.22) than did participants in the happy recipient conditions
(M ⫽ 1.24, SD ⫽ 0.51).
A 2 ⫻ 2 ANOVA on the perceived happiness ratings yielded a
main effect only for recipient’s emotion, F(1, 99) ⫽ 870.24, p ⬍
.0001, ␩2 ⫽ .90, indicating that participants in the angry recipient
conditions judged the recipients as being less happy (M ⫽ 1.52,
SD ⫽ 0.67) than did participants in the happy recipient conditions
(M ⫽ 6.12, SD ⫽ 0.89).
To check our manipulation of consequences of rejection, we
asked our participants what would happen if the recipient rejected
their offer (1 ⫽ we would both receive nothing and 2 ⫽ the offer
would be reduced by 10%). All participants answered this question
correctly. Because the manipulation of consequences of rejection
was intended to affect the impact that participants thought the
recipient could have on the distribution of the chips, we also asked
the participants about the relative impact of X and Y on the
eventual distribution of the chips (1 ⫽ X could have more impact
and 7 ⫽ Y could have more impact). A 2 ⫻ 2 ANOVA on this
measure yielded only a consequences of rejection main effect, F(1,
99) ⫽ 43.31, p ⬍ .0001, ␩2 ⫽ .30, indicating that participants in
the high-consequences conditions (M ⫽ 4.02, SD ⫽ 1.71) felt that
the potential impact of the recipient was higher than did participants in the low-consequences condition (M ⫽ 1.88, SD ⫽ 1.86).
These findings suggest that our manipulations of recipient’s
emotion and consequences of rejection were successful.

Number of Chips Offered to the Recipient
A 2 (recipient’s emotion) ⫻ 2 (consequences of rejection)
ANOVA yielded main effects for consequences of rejection, F(1,
99) ⫽ 18.91, p ⬍ .0001, ␩2 ⫽ .16, and emotion, F(1, 99) ⫽ 10.21,
p ⬍ .01, ␩2 ⫽ .09. The main effect of consequences of rejection
indicated that the participants offered more chips to the recipient in
the high-consequences conditions (M ⫽ 47.59, SD ⫽ 6.04) than in
the low-consequences conditions (M ⫽ 38.76, SD ⫽ 14.59). The
emotion main effect indicated that the participants offered fewer
chips to the angry recipient (M ⫽ 40.33, SD ⫽ 14.41) than to the
happy recipient (M ⫽ 46.51, SD ⫽ 7.17).
These two main effects were qualified, however, by a significant
Recipient’s Emotion ⫻ Consequences of Rejection interaction,
F(1, 99) ⫽ 9.74, p ⬍ .01, ␩2 ⫽ .09. The cell means are depicted
in Table 4. In agreement with our predictions, the table shows that
participants offered fewer chips to an angry recipient when the
consequence of rejection were low than when the consequences of
rejection were high, F(1, 99) ⫽ 25.01, p ⬍ .0001, whereas the
offers to a happy recipient were not significantly affected by the
consequences of rejection, F(1, 99) ⫽ 0.91, ns. Moreover, in the
low-consequences conditions, participants offered fewer chips to

609

Table 4
Number of Chips Offered to the Recipient as a Function of
Consequences of Rejection and Recipient’s Emotion:
Experiment 3
Angry
Consequences
High
Low

Happy

M

SD

M

SD

47.52
32.56

7.11
16.31

47.67
45.21

4.89
9.03

an angry recipient than to a happy recipient, F(1, 99) ⫽ 16.62, p ⬍
.0001. Tukey’s honestly significant differences tests ( p ⬍ .05)
indicated that offers were significantly lower when the recipient
was angry and consequences of rejection were low than in any of
the other conditions ( ps ⬍ .05).

Likelihood That the Recipient Will Accept the Offer
As in Experiments 1 and 2, we asked the participants about the
likelihood that the recipient would accept their offer (1 ⫽ very
unlikely and 7 ⫽ very likely). A 2 ⫻ 2 ANOVA indicated significant main effects of recipient’s emotion, F(1, 99) ⫽ 22.84, p ⬍
.0001, ␩2 ⫽ .19, and consequences of rejection, F(1, 99) ⫽ 17.73,
p ⬍ .0001, ␩2 ⫽ .16, that were qualified by a significant Recipient’s Emotion ⫻ Consequences of Rejection interaction, F(1,
99) ⫽ 6.82, p ⬍ .01, ␩2 ⫽ .06. As Table 5 shows, participants in
the angry recipient and low-consequences condition especially
anticipated a low likelihood of acceptance. Tukey’s honestly significant difference tests ( p ⬍ .05) indicated that the anticipated
likelihood of acceptance was significantly lower in this cell than in
each of the other cells ( ps ⬍ .05). Apparently, the participants did
anticipate the possibility that their low offer would be rejected,
which accords with the notion that bargainers may be less concerned with getting to yes when the consequences of rejection are
low.

Importance of Rejection
We asked participants to what extent the fact that the recipient
had the possibility to reject their offer had affected their decision
(1 ⫽ absolutely not and 7 ⫽ absolutely). A 2 ⫻ 2 ANOVA
revealed a main effect only of consequences of rejection, F(1,
99) ⫽ 18.03, p ⬍ .0001, ␩2 ⫽ .15, suggesting that the recipient’s
option to reject was less essential to the participants’ decision
when the consequences of rejection were low (M ⫽ 3.78, SD ⫽
1.78) than when the consequences of rejection were high (M ⫽
5.19, SD ⫽ 1.57).

Recipient’s Perceived Limit
To assess the recipient’s perceived limit, we asked the participants how many chips they believed that the recipient should be
offered for the participant to accept the offer. A 2 (recipient’s
emotion) ⫻ 2 (consequences of rejection) ANOVA on this number
yielded a main effect only for recipient’s emotion, F(1, 99) ⫽ 4.71,
p ⬍ .04, ␩2 ⫽ .05, indicating that participants believed that the
angry recipient’s limit (M ⫽ 49.37, SD ⫽ 11.04) was higher than
the happy recipient’s limit (M ⫽ 45.14, SD ⫽ 8.24).

VAN DIJK, VAN KLEEF, STEINEL, AND VAN BEEST

610

Table 5
Likelihood That the Recipient Will Accept the Offer, as a
Function of Consequences of Rejection and Recipient’s
Emotion: Experiment 3
Angry
Consequences

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

High
Low

Happy

M

SD

M

SD

5.26
3.48

1.16
1.66

5.81
5.38

0.96
1.35

Participants’ Emotions
As in Experiments 1 and 2, we asked participants whether they
felt angry or happy. A 2 ⫻ 2 ANOVA on the anger ratings yielded
a main effect only for recipient’s emotion, F(1, 99) ⫽ 61.71, p ⬍
.0001, ␩2 ⫽ .38, indicating that participants in the angry recipient
conditions reported being more angry (M ⫽ 3.29, SD ⫽ 1.94) than
did participants in the happy recipient conditions (M ⫽ 1.14, SD ⫽
0.35). A 2 ⫻ 2 ANOVA on the happiness ratings yielded a main
effect of recipient’s emotion, F(1, 99) ⫽ 123.42, p ⬍ .0001, ␩2 ⫽
.56, indicating that participants in the angry recipient conditions
reported being less happy (M ⫽ 3.06, SD ⫽ 1.41) than did
participants in the happy recipient conditions (M ⫽ 5.63, SD ⫽
1.22). In addition, we also observed a main effect of consequences
of rejection, F(1, 99) ⫽ 4.46, p ⬍ .05, ␩2 ⫽ .04, indicating that
participants reported being a bit more happy when the consequences of having their offer rejected would be low (M ⫽ 4.24,
SD ⫽ 1.91) than when the consequences would be high (M ⫽ 3.74,
SD ⫽ 1.89).

Mediation Analysis
In Experiments 1 and 2, we identified perceived limits as a
crucial mediator on both theoretical and empirical grounds. In this
experiment, however, perceived limits were not assumed to be
crucial for explaining the offers. The fact that the manipulation of
the consequences of rejection significantly affected the offers but
not the recipient’s perceived limit corroborates this notion. On
theoretical grounds, we did anticipate an alternative mediator: the
participants’ emotions. In particular, we reasoned that the effects
of emotion would be mediated by the participants’ anger,2 but
primarily so when the consequences of rejection were low. This
means that we anticipated mediated moderation (Baron & Kenny,
1986; Muller, Judd, & Yzerbyt, 2005).
We tested whether the three conditions needed for establishing
mediated moderation were satisfied (Muller et al., 2005) by testing
(a) whether our independent variables (delta, recipient’s emotion,
and their interaction) affected the offers, (b) whether they affected
the participants’ anger (i.e., the mediator), and (c) whether after
inclusion of the interaction between the consequences of rejection
and participants’ anger, the reported Consequences of Rejection ⫻
Recipient’s Emotion interaction would become nonsignificant. As
our ANOVA findings on the offer have already shown, the first
condition was met by showing significant effects of consequences
of rejection, emotion, and the Consequences of Rejection ⫻ Recipient’s Emotion interaction (for consequences of rejection, ␤ ⫽
⫺0.37, p ⬍ .0001; for recipient’s emotion, ␤ ⫽ 0.27, p ⬍ .01; for

the interaction, ␤ ⫽ 0.27, p ⬍ .01; R2 ⫽ .28). The second
condition was met by the significant effect for recipient’s emotion
on the participants’ anger (␤ ⫽ ⫺0.61, p ⬍ .0001; R2 ⫽ .41).
Finally, the results of our regression analyses showed that after
inclusion of the participants’ anger and the Consequences of
Rejection ⫻ Participants’ Anger interaction term, the effects of
participant’s anger and the Consequences of Rejection ⫻ Participants’ Anger interaction term reached significance (respectively,
␤ ⫽ ⫺0.25, p ⫽ .02, and ␤ ⫽ ⫺0.55, p ⫽ .001), whereas the main
effects of consequences of rejection and recipient’s emotion and
the Consequences of Rejection ⫻ Recipient’s Emotion interaction
all became nonsignificant (for consequences of rejection, ␤ ⫽
0.03, p ⫽ .85; for recipient’s emotion, ␤ ⫽ 0.17, p ⫽ .10; for the
interaction, ␤ ⫽ 0.09, p ⫽ .36; R2 ⫽ .38). These findings thus
suggest that the fact that offers when delta equals 0.9 were significantly affected by the recipient’s emotion can be explained by the
fact that in that condition the effect on offers was mediated by the
participants’ anger. A Sobel test indicated that the reduction was
significant (Z ⫽ ⫺2.28, p ⬍ .05).

Discussion
The results of Experiment 3 again suggest that communicating
anger is not without risk. In the low-consequences conditions,
participants offered fewer chips to a recipient who communicated
anger than to a recipient who communicated happiness. Again, it
appears that the consequences of rejection play an important role
in shaping the effect of emotions on bargaining behavior. When
the consequences of rejection were low, the participants appeared
to be less bothered by the fact that the recipient might reject their
offer. It is in this condition that communication of anger backfired
and led to lower offers. Moreover, as our mediation analyses
showed, it appears that the process that can be held accountable for
this adverse effect is that when the consequences of rejection are
low, the participants released their own anger by making low
offers.
It is also interesting to see that in contrast to Experiments 1 and
2, our manipulations did affect the estimated likelihood of acceptance. As we stated in our introduction to Experiment 3, this
finding is explained by the fact that we manipulated the consequences of rejection. When the consequences of rejection are low,
the offer’s perceived acceptability becomes a less important determinant of bargaining behavior because high outcomes can be
obtained even after rejection.
The findings of Experiment 3 thus corroborate our main reasoning by revealing the adverse effects of showing anger. It may
be noted, however, that there is one other aspect in which the
results of Experiment 3 differed from the findings of Experiments
1 and 2. In Experiments 1 and 2, we found that in the case of
symmetric information participants made higher offers to the an2

We also considered the participants’ happiness ratings as a potential
mediator, but the analyses indicated that after inclusion of the Consequences of Rejection ⫻ Participants’ Happiness interaction, the Consequences of Rejection ⫻ Recipient’s Emotion interaction on the offers,
although considerably reduced, remained significant ( p ⫽ .04). Apparently, and in agreement with the importance ascribed to anger in bargaining, anger played a more crucial role in explaining offers than did happiness.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

EMOTIONS IN BARGAINING

gry recipient than to the happy recipient. In the current experiment,
we did not observe such a significant difference in the condition in
which the consequences of rejection were high. In essence, the
structure of the symmetric information conditions of Experiments
1 and 2 resembled the structure of the high-consequences condition of Experiment 3 (i.e., in all these conditions both players
would obtain zero outcomes if the offer was rejected). Why then
did we not observe a similar effect in Experiment 3? To understand
why, we should acknowledge that the setup in Experiment 3
differed in one important way from that of Experiments 1 and 2:
Whereas in Experiments 1 and 2 the bargaining situation was
asymmetric (i.e., parties bargained over the chips of unequal
value), the situation in Experiment 3 was symmetric (i.e., parties
bargained over the chips of equal value). This observation is
important because previous research and theorizing suggest that
there may be more leeway in distributing scarce resources in
situations of asymmetry than in situations of symmetry (e.g.,
Loewenstein & Moore, 2003; Wade-Benzoni, Tenbrunsel, & Bazerman, 1996).
In particular, it has been argued that in situations of symmetry,
equal division provides a strong anchor for decisions (cf. Allison
& Messick, 1990; see also Messick, 1993, who talked about the
attractiveness of the equal division rule). In situations of asymmetry, however, there may be more (normative) ambiguity on how to
distribute outcomes. For example, in Experiments 1 and 2, one
could argue that the chips should be distributed equally (which
would lead to an unequal distribution of the money) but also that
one should compensate for the asymmetric value of the chips (i.e.,
strive for an equal distribution of the money). The fact that there
may be several interpretations as to what would be fair may render
the situation more ambiguous (see also Wade-Benzoni et al.,
1996). Loewenstein and Moore (2003) were very explicit about
this when applying this notion to bargaining. With regard to
bargaining in situations of symmetry, they noted and found that
when parties hold similar interest and power (i.e., a situation like
the one we studied in the case of delta ⫽ 0), an equal split is
generally a focal settlement for bargainers. In more ambiguous
situations, they argued, it would be less likely to find such a strong
focal point. In this respect, Loewenstein and Moore explicitly
referred to asymmetry between parties and noted that “if there is
ambiguity in the situation that allows for alternative interpretations, motivations and expectations will have an effect” (p. 41).
The fact that we did observe an effect of communicated emotions
in Experiments 1 and 2 in the symmetric information condition
accords with this view.3

General Discussion
In agreement with the social functional account of emotions
(see, e.g., Keltner & Haidt, 1999), the current findings show that
emotions strongly shape the bargaining process. Previous research
on the interpersonal effects of emotions basically suggested that it
pays to be angry in bargaining (Sinaceur & Tiedens, 2006; Van
Kleef et al., 2004a, 2004b). The current findings paint a more
complex and differentiated picture of the emotion– behavior link in
bargaining. The results underscore the importance of distinguishing between the informational effects and the behavioral effects of
communicated emotions. The three studies showed uniform effects
when it comes to the informational consequences of communicat-

611

ing anger, but they differed with regard to the behavioral consequences. Whereas all three experiments suggested that people infer
that angry bargainers have higher limits, the findings of Experiments 2 and 3 indicate that behavioral effects strongly depend on
the structural characteristics of the bargaining situation. In particular, the results show that communicated anger may backfire if
bargainers can deceive their angry opponent (Experiment 2) or if
the consequences of rejection are reduced (Experiment 3).
It should be noted that despite these insights, the current studies
do not refute the basic reasoning underlying the analysis or previous theorizing on communicated emotions (e.g., Sinaceur &
Tiedens, 2006; Van Kleef et al., 2004a, 2004b). In agreement with
these previous studies, we too assign a central role to perceived
limits in bargaining and the negative consequences that bargainers
may ascribe to making low offers to angry opponents. Moreover,
the results of Experiment 1 corroborate the findings and reasoning
of such prior research. We obtained these findings by manipulating
emotion independently from the offer. In this sense, our manipulation was different from those used in previous research in which
manipulated emotions were closely connected to the offers (e.g.,
Van Kleef et al., 2004a, 2004b). In these studies, participants made
an offer and then, for example, learned that their opponent reacted
with anger to their offer (e.g., by communicating “This offer
makes me really angry”). We decided to disentangle the offer from
the communicated emotions by having the recipients (supposedly)
respond to the general information participants typed about how
they viewed bargaining in general. The advantage of this procedure is that it precludes the possibility that communicated anger is
primarily an evaluation of the offer. As a consequence, it excludes
the possibility that people decide to give in to an angry opponent
because they conclude that their opponent apparently did not like
the offer. With the alternative procedure, we were able to show
effects identical to those of Van Kleef et al. (2004a, 2004b) in our
Experiment 1, thereby lending more credence to their basic reasoning.
We extend and qualify previous findings, however, by explicitly
distinguishing between the informational and behavioral consequences of communicated emotions and by pointing to the situational contingencies that govern and determine the behavioral
implications of emotional expressions. We have demonstrated that
expressions of anger versus happiness carry information that has
consequences for the perceiver’s subsequent behavior. Moreover,
3

We did not check for this possibility, but some indirect support for the
post hoc explanation comes from inspection of the standard deviations in
the symmetric information conditions of Experiments 1 and 2 and the
high-consequences condition of Experiment 3. As this comparison shows,
standard deviations were smaller in Experiment 3, which would fit with the
notion that leeway was more restricted there. We are, of course, aware that
this is a post hoc explanation with indirect empirical support, but it may be
interesting to note that previous studies that allowed for a similar comparison revealed a similar pattern. In their studies on the effects of social value
orientations on the strategic use of fairness in ultimatum bargaining, Van
Dijk et al. (2004) reported findings obtained in an ultimatum bargaining
study with asymmetric values (similar to the setup we used in Experiment
1) and a delta game study with symmetric values (similar to the setup we
used in Experiment 3), and they too found that standard deviations for the
offers were smaller in the case of a delta game with chips of symmetric
value than in the case of an ultimatum game with asymmetric value.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

612

VAN DIJK, VAN KLEEF, STEINEL, AND VAN BEEST

these consequences depend on the structural characteristics of the
bargaining situation. For example, building on previous insights
derived from the ultimatum bargaining literature, we suggest that
people may actively try to lower the angry opponent’s limits by
using deception as a strategic tool.
In this respect, the current findings also add to the literature on
deception in bargaining. It has been noted that the bargaining
process is ripe with opportunities for deception (e.g., Bok, 1978;
Boles, Croson, & Murnighan, 2000; O’Connor & Carnevale, 1997;
Steinel & De Dreu, 2004). Research on deception in bargaining is
still in its embryonic phase, however, especially with regard to the
antecedents of deception. Prior research on the use of deception in
bargaining has predominantly taken an individual and instrumental
perspective in the sense that people are assumed to be more likely
to resort to deception the more likely it is that deception will bring
them higher personal outcomes (e.g., Boles et al., 2000; Lewicki,
1983; Lewicki & Litterer, 1985; O’Connor & Carnevale, 1997;
Tenbrunsel, 1998; see also Trevino & Youngblood, 1990). On one
hand, the findings of Experiment 2 align with this framework
because they suggest that people strategically use deception to
lower the other’s limits. On the other hand, they illustrate that
people do not indiscriminately turn to deception in the sense that
they are more likely to refrain from deceiving the happy recipient,
to the point where they even offered more chips to the happy recipient
than to the angry recipient. This view of “tailored deception” accords
with more recent insights by Steinel and De Dreu (2004), who
demonstrated that people are more willing to deceive competitive
opponents than cooperative opponents. It also accords with findings
reported by Paese and Gilin (2000; see also Paese, Schreiber, &
Taylor, 2003), who found that “nice” behavior in bargaining, in the
form of honest disclosure of own alternatives, increased negotiators’
willingness to share information and make concessions.
At this point, it is interesting to further discuss the differences
between the findings we obtained in Experiments 1 and 2 in which we
varied the distribution of information (symmetric vs. asymmetric). As
we noted, this manipulation has been used successfully before, in the
way we used it both in Experiment 1 (i.e., in which participants could
only make an offer) and in Experiment 2 (i.e., where participants
could also send information before making their offer). What our
findings show is that effects of information advantage may be fundamentally different in situations in which people can only make an
offer than in situations in which people can also send information
before making their offer. That is, we did observe a significant
interaction between emotion and information on the offers in Experiment 2, but not on those in Experiment 1. As we reasoned, this
difference was because of the fact that with a preoffer sending of
information, bargainers may actively change the limits of their opponent. It appears that this active process is necessary for the Emotion ⫻
Information interaction to emerge.
Prior research has never acknowledged this difference. Of
course, this has much to do with the reason why these situations
were studied in the first place. As we reasoned in our introduction,
the main purpose of introducing asymmetry of information in
research on ultimatum bargaining research has been to demonstrate that people often make high offers because they fear that low
offers will be rejected. In this respect, both possibilities provide the
opportunity to make lower offers, and as such both situations have
primarily been regarded as evidence for the fear of rejection
hypothesis (e.g., Pillutla & Murnighan, 2003). On the theoretical

level, this means that in previous research a situation like that of
Experiment 1 was not treated as being fundamentally different
from a situation in which people could send information, and as
such making low offers in both situations was mainly interpreted as
strategic and self-interested behavior. The current findings corroborate this reasoning but in addition show that the possibility of sending
information offers new possibilities and behavioral effects that do not
necessarily surface in a situation without exchange of information.
Indeed, the findings of Experiment 2 show that people are especially
likely to deceive an angry opponent. Put differently, it also means that
with a happy opponent people do not want to go “all the way” to
further their own outcomes. Thus, there are limits to the strategic
means that people use to further their own outcomes, and these limits
are partly shaped by interpersonal effects of emotions.
With our Experiment 3 on delta bargaining, we were also able to
show that the interpersonal effects of emotions in bargaining may be
contingent on the consequences of rejection. With regard to the
theoretical analysis regarding emotion effects in bargaining, the findings suggest that when fear of rejection is low, communicating anger
may backfire. At this point, it seems appropriate to elaborate some
more on the difference in processes leading up to the findings we
reported in Experiments 2 and 3. Whereas both studies suggest that
communicating anger may backfire and both studies assign a crucial
role to fear of rejection, it should be noted that the underlying process
for Experiments 2 and 3 was fundamentally different. In Experiment
2, our deception study, the process was essentially based on the notion
that in all conditions, participants fear the consequences of having
their offers rejected, and that deception provides bargainers the possibility to reach acceptance of low offers. Thus, deception did not alter
the consequences of rejection, but merely functioned as a strategic
tool to prevent rejection. In contrast, in Experiment 3 the manipulation
of relative power pertained to the consequences of rejection. As a
result, participants in Experiment 3 did not seem unequivocally concerned with preventing rejection. Our data suggest that participants
could live with the idea that the angry opponent would reject their
offer, as long as the consequences of rejection were mild. A more
explicit comparison of the data on how likely participants thought it
was that the recipient would accept their offer corroborates this view.
In Experiments 1 and 2, these likelihood ratings were high and not
affected by our manipulations, suggesting that in all conditions participants were equally focused on getting their offer accepted. In
Experiment 3, the likelihood ratings were especially low when consequences of rejection were low and the recipient was angry.
Another way of putting it is that in Experiment 3, the participants’ anger could find its way to the person responsible for their
anger, the angry recipient. As we demonstrated, communicated
anger also backfired in Experiment 2, when the participants had an
information advantage and could deceive the recipient. Our mediation analysis indicated that in that experiment, the offers were
mediated by the perceived limits, which fits with the notion that if
the consequences of rejection are high, people primarily let their
decisions be influenced by the limits they assign to their opponent.
One might wonder, however, whether the process might also run
via the participants’ emotions, as it did in Experiment 3. We
checked for this possibility by testing for moderated mediation
along the lines of Experiment 3. This analysis indicated that the
offers in Experiment 2 were not mediated by the participants’
emotion (neither anger nor happiness). It thus seems that if the
consequences of rejection are high, the bargainers’ first interest is

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

EMOTIONS IN BARGAINING

to deal with their opponent’s limits, not to act on their own
emotions. If, however, the consequences of rejection are low, then
own emotions come into play. As such, our findings also constitute
first evidence for the possibility that the reciprocity of emotions
(Hatfield et al., 1994; Van Kleef et al., 2004a) in bargaining
contexts is not only restricted to the experienced emotion (I get
angry if you get angry) but may also directly translate into behavior. Prior theorizing on communicated emotions did acknowledge
the possibility of detrimental effects because of reciprocated emotions, but the lack of behavioral effects has led researchers to
conclude that its influence might be limited, especially in the short
term. For example, Sinaceur and Tiedens (2006, p. 321) concluded
that “the expression of anger may be a strategy best suited for
relatively short single-shot negotiations. But in that context, expressions of anger appear to be a powerful strategy for claiming
value.” The current findings argue against such general advice, as
it is hard to imagine a negotiation setting that would be even
shorter than the ultimatum bargaining settings we used.
The advantage of concentrating on ultimatum bargaining was
that it constitutes a clear bargaining setting with a clear outcome
structure, in which many dynamics due to making offers and
counteroffers are kept out of the picture. Thanks to this inherent
simplicity, we were able to provide clear findings and conclusions
regarding interpersonal effects of emotions. In future research, it
may also be interesting to broaden the scope by including other
determinants of the power– dependency relation between bargainers, such as the number and attractiveness of the alternatives that
allocators and recipients have at their disposal. Bargainers are less
dependent on their opponent the more and the higher their alternatives are (e.g., Fisher & Ury, 1981; Pinkley, 1995). If we would
include this in our current ultimatum paradigms, it seems likely
that communicating anger is especially detrimental when one’s
opponent has a high alternative, many alternatives, or both.
An alternative course would be to see how our findings generalize
to other types of bargaining. For example, it may be especially
worthwhile to expand the view by also addressing integrative bargaining. In integrative bargaining, bargainers may generate integrative
potential (i.e., realize a win–win situation; Fisher & Ury, 1981) if they
disclose their true preferences to their opponent (R. A. Friedman &
Shapiro, 1995). On the basis of the current findings, we suggest that
communicated emotions may distort this process and in particular that
bargainers may be less willing to display their true preferences to an
angry opponent. In our studies, the concealment of true preferences
(and the sending of incorrect information) was used to promote the
participants’ own outcomes. In the context of integrative bargaining,
however, such a deceptive strategy might be counterproductive. As
such, communicated anger might do more than “just” backfire to the
person communicating the anger. It might prove to be detrimental for
all people involved if it keeps the bargainers from realizing the
integrative potential (see also Allred, Mallozzi, Matsui, & Raia, 1997;
Barry, Fulmer, & Van Kleef, 2004; Forgas, 1998), and communicating happiness may be more beneficial for all parties involved
(Carnevale & Isen, 1986; Moore, Kurtzberg, Thompson, & Morris,
1999).
To conclude, the current studies underscore the importance of the
interpersonal effects of communicated emotions. In contrast to previous research, this does not result in simple “what-to-do-in-bargaining”
advice that can be applied no matter what. What it does show is that
one should think well before following up on the advice that com-

613

municating anger pays. Before doing so, be sure to assess the structural characteristics of the bargaining situation in terms of the consequences of rejecting offers and the possibilities for deception.

References
Allison, S. T., & Messick, D. M. (1990). Social decision heuristics in the
use of shared resources. Journal of Behavioral Decision Making, 3,
195–204.
Allred, K. G., Mallozzi, J. S., Matsui, F., & Raia, C. P. (1997). The
influence of anger and compassion on negotiation performance. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 70, 175–187.
Baron, R. A. (1990). Environmentally induced positive affect: Its impact
on self-efficacy, task performance, negotiation, and conflict. Journal of
Applied Social Psychology, 20, 368 –384.
Baron, R. M., & Kenny, D. A. (1986). The moderator–mediator variable
distinction in social psychological research: Conceptual, strategic, and
statistical considerations. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
51, 1173–1182.
Barry, B., Fulmer, I. S., & Van Kleef, G. A. (2004). I laughed, I cried, I
settled: The role of emotion in negotiation. In M. J. Gelfand & J. M.
Brett (Eds.), The handbook of negotiation and culture (pp. 71–94).
Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
Bok, S. (1978). Lying: Moral choice in public and private life. New York:
Pantheon Books.
Boles, T. L., Croson, R. T. A., & Murnighan, J. K. (2000). Deception and
retribution in repeated ultimatum bargaining. Organizational Behavior
and Human Decision Processes, 83, 235–259.
Camerer, C., & Thaler, R. H. (1995). Anomalies: Ultimatums, dictators and
manners. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 9, 209 –219.
Carnevale, P. J. D., & Isen, A. M. (1986). The influence of positive affect and
visual access on the discovery of integrative solutions in bilateral negotiation. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 37, 1–17.
Clark, M. S., Pataki, S. P., & Carver, V. H. (1996). Some thoughts and
findings on self-presentation of emotions in relationships. In G. J. O.
Fletcher & J. Fitness (Eds.), Knowledge structures in close relationships: A social psychological approach (pp. 247–274). Mahwah, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Emerson, R. M. (1972a). Exchange theory, Part I: A psychological basis
for exchange. In J. Berger, N. Zelditch, Jr., & B. Anderson (Eds.),
Sociological theories in progress (Vol. 2, pp. 33–57). Boston:
Houghton-Mifflin.
Emerson, R. M. (1972b). Exchange theory, Part II: Exchange relations and
networks. In J. Berger, N. Zelditch, Jr., & B. Anderson (Eds.), Sociological
theories in progress (Vol. 2, pp. 58 – 87). Boston: Houghton-Mifflin.
Fisher, R., & Ury, W. (1981). Getting to yes: Negotiating agreement
without giving in. Boston: Houghton-Mifflin.
Forgas, J. P. (1998). On feeling good and getting your way: Mood effects
on negotiator cognition and behavior. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 74, 565–577.
Frank, R. H. (1988). Passions within reasons: The strategic role of the
emotions. New York: W. W. Norton.
Friedman, H. S., & Riggio, R. E. (1981). Effect of individual differences in
nonverbal expressiveness on transmission of emotion. Journal of Nonverbal Behavior, 6, 96 –104.
Friedman, R., Anderson, C., Brett, J., Olekalns, M., Goates, N., & Lisco,
C. C. (2004). The positive and negative effects of anger on dispute
resolution: Evidence from electronically mediated disputes. Journal of
Applied Psychology, 89, 369 –376.
Friedman, R. A., & Shapiro, D. L. (1995). Deception and mutual gains bargaining:
Are they mutually exclusive? Negotiation Journal, 11, 243–253.
Frijda, N. H. (1994). Emotions are functional, most of the time. In P.
Ekman & R. J. Davidson (Eds.), The nature of emotion: Fundamental
questions (pp. 112–122). New York: Oxford University Press.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

614

VAN DIJK, VAN KLEEF, STEINEL, AND VAN BEEST

Güth, W., Schmittberger, R., & Schwarze, B. (1982). An experimental
analysis of ultimatum games. Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization, 3, 367–388.
Güth, W., & Tietz, R. (1990). Ultimatum bargaining behavior: A survey
and comparison of experimental results. Journal of Economic Psychology, 11, 417– 449.
Handgraaf, M. J. J., Van Dijk, E., & De Cremer, D. (2003). Social utility
in ultimatum bargaining. Social Justice Research, 16, 263–283.
Hatfield, E., Cacioppo, J., & Rapson, R. L. (1994). Emotional contagion.
New York: Cambridge University Press.
Hess, U., & Blairy, S. (2001). Facial mimicry and emotional contagion to
dynamic emotional facial expressions and their influence on decoding
accuracy. International Journal of Psychophysiology, 40, 129 –141.
Kagel, J. H., Kim, C., & Moser, D. (1996). Fairness in ultimatum games
with asymmetric information and asymmetric payoffs. Games and Economic Behavior, 13, 100 –111.
Karasawa, K. (2001). Anger vs guilt inference of responsibility and interpersonal reactions. Psychological Reports, 89, 731–739.
Keltner, D., & Haidt, J. (1999). Social functions of emotions at four levels
of analysis. Cognition & Emotion, 13, 505–521.
Komorita, S. S., & Parks, C. D. (1995). Interpersonal relations: Mixedmotive interaction. Annual Review of Psychology, 46, 183–207.
Lawler, E. J. (1992). Power processes in bargaining. Sociological Quarterly, 33, 17–34.
Lewicki, R. J. (1983). Lying and deception: A behavioral model. In M. H.
Bazerman & R. J. Lewicki (Eds.), Negotiation in organizations (pp.
68 –90). Beverly Hills, CA: Sage.
Lewicki, R. J., & Litterer, J. (1985). Negotiation. Homewood, IL: Irwin.
Lewicki, R. J., & Stark, N. (1996). What is ethically appropriate in
negotiations: An empirical examination of bargaining tactics. Social
Justice Research, 9, 69 –95.
Loewenstein, G., & Moore, D. A. (2003). When ignorance is bliss: Information exchange and inefficiency in bargaining. Journal of Legal Studies, 33, 37–58.
Messick, D. M. (1993). Equality as a decision heuristic. In B. A. Mellers
& J. Baron (Eds.), Psychological perspectives on justice (pp. 11–31).
New York: Cambridge University Press.
Moore, D. A., Kurtzberg, T. R., Thompson, L. L., & Morris, M. W. (1999).
Long and short routes to success in electronically mediated negotiations:
Group affiliations and good vibrations. Organizational Behavior and
Human Decision Processes, 77, 22– 43.
Muller, D., Judd, C. M., & Yzerbyt, V. Y. (2005). When moderation is
mediated and mediation is moderated. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 98, 852– 863.
O’Connor, K. M., & Carnevale, P. J. (1997). A nasty but effective negotiation strategy: Misrepresentation of a common-value issue. Personality
and Social Psychology Bulletin, 23, 504 –515.
Paese, P. W., & Gilin, D. A. (2000). When an adversary is caught telling
the truth: Reciprocal cooperation versus self-interest in distributive
bargaining. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 26, 79 –90.
Paese, P. W., Schreiber, M., & Taylor (2003). Caught telling the truth:
Effects of honesty and communication media in distributive negotiations. Group Decision and Negotiation, 12, 537–566.
Pillutla, M. M., & Murnighan, J. K. (1995). Being fair or appearing fair:
Strategic behavior in ultimatum game bargaining. Academy of Management Journal, 38, 1408 –1426.
Pillutla, M. M., & Murnighan, J. K. (1996). Unfairness, anger, and spite:
Emotional rejections and ultimatum offers. Organizational Behavior
and Human Decision Processes, 68, 208 –224.
Pillutla, M. M., & Murnighan, J. K. (2003). Fairness in bargaining. Social
Justice Research, 16, 241–262.
Pinkley, R. L. (1995). Impact of knowledge regarding alternatives to
settlement in dyadic negotiations: Whose knowledge counts? Journal of
Applied Psychology, 80, 403– 417.

Pruitt, D. G., & Carnevale, P. J. (1993). Negotiation in social conflict.
Oxford, England: Oxford University Press.
Pruitt, D. G., & Kimmel, M. J. (1977). Twenty years of experimental
gaming: Critique, synthesis, and suggestions for the future. Annual
Review of Psychology, 28, 363–392.
Roth, A. E., & Malouf, M. W. K. (1979). Game-theoretic models and the
role of information in bargaining. Psychological Review, 86, 574 –594.
Roth, A. E., & Murnighan, J. K. (1982). The role of information in
bargaining: An experimental study. Econometrica, 50, 1123–1142.
Rubin, J. Z., & Brown, B. (1975). The social psychology of bargaining and
negotiations. New York: Academic Press.
Rubin, J. Z., Pruitt, D. G., & Kim, S. H. (1994). Social conflict: Escalation,
stalemate, and settlement (2nd ed.). New York: McGraw-Hill.
Samuelson, W. (1984). Bargaining under asymmetric information. Econometrica, 52, 995–1005.
Sinaceur, M., & Tiedens, L. (2006). Get mad and get more than even:
When and why anger expression is effective in negotiations. Journal of
Experimental Social Psychology, 42, 314 –322.
Steinel, W., & De Dreu, C. K. W. (2004). Social motives and strategic
misrepresentation in social decision making. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 86, 419 – 434.
Straub, P. G., & Murnighan, J. K. (1995). An experimental investigation of
ultimatum games: Information, fairness, expectations, and lowest acceptable
offers. Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization, 27, 345–364.
Suleiman, R. (1996). Expectations and fairness in a modified ultimatum
game. Journal of Economic Psychology, 17, 531–554.
Tenbrunsel, A. E. (1998). Misrepresentation and expectations of misrepresentation in an ethical dilemma: The role of incentives and temptation.
Academy of Management Journal, 41, 330 –339.
Thaler, R. H. (1988). Anomalies: The ultimatum game. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 2, 195–206.
Trevino, L. K., & Youngblood, S. A. (1990). Bad apples in bad barrels: A
causal analysis of ethical decision making behavior. Journal of Applied
Psychology, 75, 378 –385.
Van Dijk, E., De Cremer, D., & Handgraaf, M. J. J. (2004). Social value
orientations and the strategic use of fairness in ultimatum bargaining.
Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 40, 697–707.
Van Dijk, E., & Tenbrunsel, A. (2005). The battle between self-interest and
fairness in bargaining: Ultimatum, dictator, and delta games. In S. W.
Gilliland, D. D. Steiner, D. P. Skarlicki, & K. Van den Bos (Eds.), What
motivates fairness in organizations? (pp. 31– 48). Greenwich, CT: Information Age Publishing.
Van Dijk, E., & Vermunt, R. (2000). Strategy and fairness in social
decision making: Sometimes it pays to be powerless. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 36, 1–25.
Van Kleef, G. A., De Dreu, C. K. W., & Manstead, A. S. R. (2004a). The
interpersonal effects of anger and happiness in negotiations. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 86, 57–76.
Van Kleef, G. A., De Dreu, C. K. W., & Manstead, A. S. R. (2004b). The
interpersonal effects of emotions in negotiations: A motivated information processing approach. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
87, 510 –528.
Wade-Benzoni, Tenbrunsel, A. E., & Bazerman, M. H. (1996). Egocentric
interpretations of fairness in asymmetric environmental social dilemmas:
Explaining harvesting behavior and the role of communication. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 67, 111–126.
Weg, E., & Zwick, R. (1994). Toward the settlement of the fairness issues
in ultimatum games: A bargaining approach. Journal of Economic
Behavior and Organization, 24, 19 –34.

Received January 20, 2006
Revision received April 13, 2007
Accepted August 9, 2007 䡲

