Journal of Personality and Social Psychology
2008, Vol. 95, No. 2, 420 – 441

Copyright 2008 by the American Psychological Association
0022-3514/08/$12.00 DOI: 10.1037/0022-3514.95.2.420

“Walking on Eggshells”: How Expressing Relationship Insecurities
Perpetuates Them
Edward P. Lemay, Jr. and Margaret S. Clark

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Yale University
The authors present a model positing that when people are insecure about a relationship partner’s
acceptance, they often express emotional vulnerabilities to the partner, which causes them to believe the
partner views them as highly vulnerable and insecure. In turn, this belief causes them to doubt the
authenticity of the partner’s expressions of positive regard, which may perpetuate the experience and
expression of insecurity that initiated the process. Prototypes of interactions with interpersonally
vulnerable individuals included partners’ inauthentic expressions of regard (Study 1). Suggesting that
these prototypes are applied to personal relationships when vulnerabilities are expressed, those who
claimed to have expressed vulnerabilities doubted the partner’s authenticity because they believed that
they were viewed as vulnerable (Studies 2A, 2B, and 4). Authenticity doubts in turn predicted perceptions
of rejection (Studies 3 and 4), which in turn predicted partner derogation and subsequent expressions of
vulnerability (Study 4). An experimental manipulation of reflected appraisals of vulnerability increased
doubts about the authenticity of a new acquaintance’s expressions of emotion (Study 5). Relational
insecurity may be perpetuated via the intrapersonal cognitive consequences of expressing it.
Keywords: close relationships, egocentrism, relationship security, acceptance, emotion expression

Clark, & Feeney, 2007; Murray, Bellavia, Rose, & Griffin, 2003).
Moreover, it deprives the self of a potentially important source of
self-esteem and affirmation (Leary & Baumeister, 2000; Murray et
al., 1998). The current research proposed and tested a theoretical
model of a normative process explaining how this type of relationship insecurity persists, even when it is confronted with a truly
valuing, loving, and accepting partner.

People have a strong need to belong in stable and caring relationships (Baumeister & Leary, 1995; Reis, Clark, & Holmes,
2004). The perception that a relationship partner values and has
positive regard for the self is critical to the perception that one has
such relationships, as it fosters confidence in the partner’s motivation to maintain the relationship and to attend to one’s needs
(Holmes & Rempel, 1989; Murray, Holmes, & Collins, 2006;
Tooby & Cosmides, 1996). Unfortunately, this belief is not a
feature of all close relationships. Instead, in some relationships,
people chronically doubt that their partners value, accept, and care
for them. This is the case even when these doubts are not reflected
in the partner’s actual thoughts and affections; many people seem
to underestimate a close partner’s acceptance of and regard for the
self (Murray, Holmes, Griffin, Bellavia, & Rose, 2001; Murray,
Holmes, MacDonald, & Ellsworth, 1998). When it persists, this
pessimistic interpretation of a partner’s thoughts and feelings
undermines the quality of the relationship both for the self and for
the partner (Downey, Freitas, Michaelis, & Khouri, 1998; Lemay,

The Expression-Based Authenticity Doubts Model
We posit a model of expression-based authenticity doubts. According to this model, when people are, for whatever reason,
insecure about a partner’s regard and acceptance, they typically
believe that they have behaved in ways that have communicated
insecurity and emotional vulnerability to the partner. These beliefs
about expressing insecurities and vulnerabilities trigger other cognitions that ultimately perpetuate relationship insecurity. In particular, the knowledge that one has communicated interpersonal
vulnerabilities regarding acceptance and rejection in the past
causes reflected appraisals of vulnerability, which are beliefs that
a partner views the self as interpersonally vulnerable— easily hurt,
emotionally volatile, and overly dependent on approval and positive feedback. These reflected appraisals of vulnerability in turn
create authenticity doubts—that is, beliefs that a partner expresses
more positive regard than he or she truly feels and conceals
negative regard. In other words, partners who are presumed to be
aware of one’s vulnerabilities are thought to “walk on eggshells.”
These authenticity doubts encourage underestimation of the partner’s actual acceptance and perpetuate the experience of insecurity
and expression of vulnerability that initiated this process. Although
it is inspired, in part, by research on individual differences, this
model posits a normative relationship process; feelings of insecurity in a particular relationship should trigger this process inde-

Edward P. Lemay, Jr., and Margaret S. Clark, Department of Psychology, Yale University.
This research was funded by a National Institute of Mental Health
National Research Service Award predoctoral fellowship awarded to Edward P. Lemay, Jr., and by National Science Foundation Grant BNS
9983417 awarded to Margaret S. Clark. The opinions and conclusions
expressed in the article are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the opinions of the National Institutes of Health or the National
Science Foundation. We thank Lindsey Beck and Elizabeth Cronson for
coding the open-ended responses in Study 1 and Angelo Hall, Kristina
Izumi, and Sofia Gutierrez for serving as confederates in Study 5.
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Edward
P. Lemay, Jr., Department of Psychology, Yale University, Box 208205,
New Haven, CT 06520-8205. E-mail: edward.lemay@yale.edu
420

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

HOW EXPRESSING INSECURITIES PERPETUATES THEM

pendently of individual differences in proclivities to feel secure
and insecure in relationships generally.
For example, Amanda’s prior overreactions to fears of rejection
from Jerry, as well as her prior attempts to seek reassurance
regarding Jerry’s affections, cause her to think that Jerry views her
as especially vulnerable and insecure. This in turn causes her to
believe that Jerry is walking on eggshells around her, feigning
more positive regard and acceptance than he truly feels, and
concealing negative sentiments. In other words, when interpreting
his positive expressions, Amanda tends to think that Jerry is “just
saying that” because he views her as sensitive. Ultimately, these
doubts about the authenticity of Jerry’s expressions of regard
maintain those insecurities regarding Jerry’s acceptance that
Amanda initially expressed. Our model is displayed in Figure 1.
We describe each path in detail.

Path a: Insecure Individuals Believe That They Express
Vulnerability
When people feel insecure about a partner’s acceptance—that is,
when they doubt whether they are truly accepted by a partner and
when they feel especially emotionally vulnerable to the prospect of
rejection by the partner—they often behave in ways that express
this insecurity and vulnerability to the partner. During times of
high threat, when rejection is currently perceived, they often do so
by defensively rejecting the partner in return. Indeed, according to
Murray and Holmes’s dependency-regulation model, when people
anticipate rejection by a partner, they tend to protect themselves by
distancing from the partner and the relationship, which is thought
to blunt the pain of rejection (see Murray et al., 2006, for a
review). Supporting this model are studies showing that people
who doubt a partner’s regard and love react to these insecurities by
self-protectively derogating their partner and denying the importance of the relationship (Murray, Holmes, & Griffin, 2000; Murray et al., 2001). This self-protection also appears to be expressed
behaviorally. For example, those with chronic doubts about a
partner’s regard appear to enact cold and hurtful behaviors toward
the partner (e.g., criticizing or insulting the partner; Murray et al.,
2003) and engage in more conflict (Murray et al., 2000).
Other indices of insecurity regarding acceptance also predict
behavioral expressions of insecurity. Those with attachmentrelated anxiety, who tend to worry about rejection and abandonment from their close relationship partners, appear especially emotionally and behaviorally volatile in response to partner
transgressions. They report feelings of anger and hostility and

a

Relationshipspecific insecurity

Expressions of
vulnerability

Trait insecurity

appear anxious and stressed when discussing major relationship
conflicts with their romantic partners (Simpson, Rholes, & Phillips, 1996). They express intense anger when their partners do not
respond supportively to their anxiety (Rholes, Simpson, & Orina,
1999; see also Mikulincer, 1998), and they intend to punish or hurt
the partner when the partner responds in ways that may not be seen
as supportive (Collins, 1996). Similarly, men high in rejection
sensitivity—a disposition to anxiously expect rejection from others—are perceived by their partners as jealous, and rejectionsensitive women are perceived as hostile and unsupportive
(Downey & Feldman, 1996, Study 3). Although some of these
reactions to felt insecurity may blunt the pain of rejection in the
present or provide a short-term sense of vindication, we consider
these reactions to be expressions of one’s vulnerability that, when
reflected upon later, may initiate cognitions that ultimately perpetuate insecurity.
During times of low threat (when people are willing to risk
dependency on a partner because a partner’s rejection is not
perceived to be certain), those who feel insecure about a partner’s
acceptance may express their vulnerabilities by seeking reassurance regarding their personal qualities and the partner’s affections.
According to Coyne’s (1976) interpersonal model of depression,
depressed individuals regularly seek this type of reassurance from
their relationship partners, and many studies have revealed a strong
relationship between depressive symptoms and reassurance seeking (Joiner, Metalsky, Katz, & Beach, 1999). In addition, other
indices of chronic insecurity about acceptance, such as anxious
attachment (Davila, 2001; Shaver, Schachner, & Mikulincer,
2005) and low self-esteem (Joiner, Katz, & Lew, 1999), also
predict seemingly excessive reassurance seeking. In our view,
although this behavior may sometimes assuage insecurities about a
partner’s regard and affections in the present, upon reflection, it
likely initiates cognitions that perpetuate the insecurity.
Of course, some reactions to relational insecurity may be unconscious (DeHart, Pelham, & Murray, 2004; Sommer &
Baumeister, 2002). However, this does not negate our model’s
assumption that people are usually aware that they have expressed
some of their vulnerabilities in the past. Their awareness can
derive from situations in which they consciously expressed vulnerabilities, from reactions of their partners or third-party observers, or from their own reflections on their past reactions. Indeed,
the fact that many of the studies reviewed above utilized selfreports supports our assumption that, when people tend to feel
insecure about a partner’s acceptance, they often believe that they
have expressed their insecurity and emotional vulnerability to the
partner.

Path b: Expressions of Vulnerability Cause Reflected
Appraisals of Vulnerability

b

Reflected appraisals of
vulnerability

c
d

421

Authenticity
doubts

Figure 1. The expression-based authenticity doubts model.

The knowledge that one has expressed vulnerability in the past
ought to promote reflected appraisals of vulnerability— beliefs that
a partner views the self as especially interpersonally vulnerable,
including easily hurt, emotionally volatile, and overly dependent
on approval and affection. Quite simply, once people think they
have expressed heightened vulnerability or sensitivity to a partner,
they tend to believe that the partner views them as especially
vulnerable or sensitive.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

422

LEMAY AND CLARK

The belief that a partner views the self as vulnerable may arise
from a purely subjective, intrapersonal process. First, their partners
may not have noticed the expressions of vulnerability. Instead,
reflected appraisals of vulnerability may arise from egocentric
biases such as the spotlight effect and the illusion of transparency.
The spotlight effect refers to the tendency for people to overestimate the extent to which others attend to their behavior (Gilovich
& Savitsky, 1999). This bias presumably arises because people
presume that what is salient to them—their own behavior—is
salient to others (Gilovich, Medvec, & Savitsky, 2000). Similarly,
the illusion of transparency refers to the tendency for people to
presume that their emotional reactions are more observable than
they are (Gilovich & Savitsky, 1999; Gilovich, Savitsky, & Medvec, 1998), an illusion that might be pronounced in close relationships (Vorauer & Cameron, 2002). For those who believe that they
have expressed vulnerabilities in the past, these biases may cause
them to believe that they are viewed as vulnerable independently
of whether the partner actually attended to those expressions.
Second, their partners may have attended to the expressions but
may not have interpreted them as expressions of an underlying
vulnerability. Although perceivers often do infer dispositions from
observable behavior, people think that perceivers do this much
more than perceivers actually do it (Van Boven, Kamada, &
Gilovich, 1999). Indeed, people tend to overestimate the extent to
which others make dispositional attributions regarding their attitudes (Van Boven et al., 1999, Study 1) and personality traits (Van
Boven et al., 1999, Study 2), and they overestimate the effects of
their social blunders or failures on observers’ evaluations
(Savitsky, Epley, & Gilovich, 2001).
These egocentric processes are likely to mediate the link between expressions of vulnerability and reflected appraisals of
vulnerability. One’s behavioral reactions to insecurity regarding a
partner’s acceptance—whether fishing for a compliment, privately
derogating the partner following a perceived transgression, avoiding the partner, directly seeking reassurance about the partner’s
affections, or openly insulting the partner—are likely salient responses to insecurity in one’s own mind, but the partner may not
notice or remember the behavior, may draw fewer dispositional
inferences than one assumes, or may interpret the behavior not as
an expression of interpersonal vulnerability but rather as evidence
of a temporary state caused by situational factors (“she just had a
bad day”). Nevertheless, a focus on one’s own reactions to insecurity may cause one to believe that one is viewed as especially
vulnerable. This is not to say that partners do not sometimes detect
one’s vulnerabilities. Indeed, there appears to be a kernel of truth
in such perceptions (Ruvolo & Fabin, 1999). Rather, our point is
that the process by which people conclude that they are viewed as
vulnerable and insecure may not depend on the partner’s actual
views and often may operate through egocentric perception.

Path c: Reflected Appraisals of Vulnerability Cause
Doubts About the Authenticity of a Partner’s Expressions
of Positive Regard
The belief that a partner views the self as vulnerable should in
turn produce authenticity doubts—suspicion that the partner expresses insincere positive thoughts and feelings, conceals negative
thoughts and feelings, and is generally cautious during interaction.

This is likely to be the case because people have shared expectations regarding how others react to interpersonally insecure and
vulnerable individuals. These expectations, colloquially referred to
as walking on eggshells, involve caution about behaving in a
manner that would cause the individual to feel rejected. People
may expect this type of reaction because of normative desires to
have rewarding interactions and avoid negative interactions (see
Kelley & Thibaut, 1978; Rusbult & Van Lange, 1996) and to
adhere to norms dictating that people should care about and avoid
hurting partners’ feelings (see Clark & Mills, 1993). When interacting with an individual who is especially insecure and vulnerable
regarding rejection and acceptance, these goals may be facilitated
by expressing positive regard, concealing negative thoughts or
feelings, and maintaining a cautious stance. Supporting the idea
that people perceive others’ expressions as cautious when such
caution seems warranted are empirical studies suggesting that
people doubt a person’s authenticity when the person appears
dependent on incentives controlled by others (e.g., Jones, Jones, &
Gergen, 1963; Vonk, 1998, 2002) or when the person appears
motivated to avoid hurting others’ feelings (DePaulo & Bell, 1996;
Pataki & Clark, 2004).
Thus, people may have prototypes that one person’s interpersonal vulnerability elicits his or her interaction partner’s caution.
Such prototypes may become relevant to interpreting a partner’s
behavior for those who, as a result of their own prior expressions,
believe they are viewed as vulnerable and insecure. Applying such
prototypes to their own relationships, they may suspect that their
partner is walking on eggshells around them, cautiously suppressing negative thoughts and feelings, and exaggerating their positive
thoughts and feelings. By frequently expressing heightened insecurity and emotional vulnerability, what was once a naı̈ve theory
about how people react to fragile, volatile individuals has become
a suspicion about the partner’s behavior.

Path d: Doubting the Authenticity of a Partner’s
Expressions of Regard Undermines Relationship Security
Doubts about the authenticity of a partner’s expressions of
regard can undermine confidence in the partner’s regard by creating a disjuncture between the partner’s positive expressions and
one’s inferences of the partner’s true thoughts and feelings. Specifically, beliefs that a partner is concealing some negative sentiment or is feigning some positive sentiment allow and even encourage people to perceive more negative regard and less positive
regard than is indicated by the actual features of the partner’s
behavior.
Indeed, a tenant of attribution theory is that people view another
person’s behavior as a product of his or her dispositions and the
external factors that constrain or facilitate that behavior (Heider,
1958; Jones & Davis, 1965; Kelley, 1967). People are less likely
to infer corresponding attitudes or traits from a target’s behavior if
there is another plausible explanation for the behavior, such as a
situational constraint on the behavior or a perceived ulterior motive (e.g., Fein, Hilton, & Miller, 1990; Gilbert, Krull, & Pelham,
1988; Jones & Harris, 1967; Miller, Visser, & Staub, 2005). More
specifically relevant to the present point, studies suggest people
discount expressions of positive feedback when situational factors
appear to render targets motivated to provide false feedback (e.g.,
DePaulo & Bell, 1996; Major, Carrington, & Carnevale, 1984).

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

HOW EXPRESSING INSECURITIES PERPETUATES THEM

Thus, when people believe that their partners are behaving cautiously, they may discount the partner’s expressions of positive
regard and acceptance as due to this caution rather than seeing
such expressions as reflecting authentic positive sentiment. That is,
in response to a partner’s compliment or expression of affection,
they may think the partner is “just being nice.”
Likewise, mundane acts that could signal the partner’s negative
regard (i.e., a negative mood) may be perceived as implying more
negative regard than is the case because they are thought to occur
in a relational context that impedes such behavior. Behaviors are
perceived as especially diagnostic of internal dispositions when
they contradict observed situational pressures (Gilbert, Krull, &
Pelham, 1988; Gilbert, Pelham, & Krull, 1988; Jones, Davis, &
Gergen, 1961; Kelley, 1967; Schwarz et al., 1991). Thus, when
one believes that a partner sees oneself as vulnerable and believes
that the partner is cautious about communicating negative regard,
partner behaviors that nonetheless are seen as communicating even
a tinge of negative sentiment are perceived as indicative of the
partner’s more extremely negative latent sentiment (i.e., acting in
an apparently cold way despite the presumed countervailing
forces).
In addition, authenticity doubts may threaten relational security
even when the partner’s behavior cannot be perceived as communicating any negative regard whatsoever. People often imagine the
presence of dispositions that are perceived to be behaviorally
extinguished by situational constraints (Miller et al., 2005). That
is, people infer dispositions from behavior in which actors did not
engage but very well might have had the situation permitted. The
belief that one’s own vulnerability has caused partners to be
cautious about communicating any negative thoughts or feelings
may serve as a perceived relational constraint that evokes this
counterfactual correspondence bias, causing those who believe that
partners are cautious to perceive that partners have more threatening sentiments lurking below a constrained congenial surface.

The Role of Trait Insecurity
We suggest a distinction between the interpersonal processes
posited by our model and effects of relatively chronic tendencies to
feel secure or insecure regarding acceptance by others in general.
Indeed, prior research supports such a distinction. Beyond individual differences in tendencies to feel secure in relationships,
people seem differentially (in)secure about acceptance and care
from one relationship partner to the next (Barry, Lakey, & Orehek,
2007; Lakey, McCabe, Fisicaro, & Drew, 1996; Lemay & Clark,
in press). Moreover, insecurity regarding a particular partner’s
acceptance and care tends to predict behavioral expressions of that
insecurity independently of individual differences in self-esteem
(Murray et al., 2003), which are thought to reflect general tendencies to be secure or insecure about others’ acceptance (Leary &
Baumeister, 2000).
Nevertheless, individual differences in interpersonal security are
likely to affect our model variables. Indeed, our model is in part
derived from and inspired by research involving individualdifferences variables. Individual-differences variables reflecting
chronic insecurity about acceptance in general do predict doubts
about a specific partner’s regard (Downey & Feldman, 1996;
Murray et al., 2000, 2001), expressions of insecurity and vulnerability to partners (Downey & Feldman, 1996; Murray, Rose,

423

Bellavia, Holmes, & Kusche, 2002; Shaver et al., 2005; Simpson
et al., 1996), and discounting of others’ expressions of acceptance
(Collins, Ford, Guichard, & Allard, 2006; Marigold, Holmes, &
Ross, 2007; Stroebe, Eagly, & Stroebe, 1974). Those who are
chronically insecure also may assume that their insecurity is
known by partners without thinking that they have previously
expressed it, perhaps through a process of projecting their own
self-views onto the views others hold of them (Kenny & DePaulo,
1993). Although not the primary focus of our model, we illustrate
the possible effect of individual differences (trait insecurity) on
model variables in Figure 1. We expect to find evidence for the
paths of our process model (Paths a, b, c, and d in Figure 1) even
after controlling for these individual differences. In the current
research, we tested model paths while controlling for individual
differences in self-esteem and attachment-related anxiety.

Summary and Research Overview
We posit that when people are insecure about a partner’s acceptance, they believe that they have expressed vulnerabilities to
partners, which causes them to believe that they are viewed as
vulnerable by partners. The belief that they are viewed as vulnerable in turn casts doubt on the authenticity of the partner’s expressions of regard and acceptance, which is likely to cause individuals
who hold such doubts to underestimate their partner’s true regard
for and acceptance of them, perpetuating the insecurities and
vulnerabilities that they initially expressed.
We present six studies testing our model. In Study 1, we tested
whether inauthentic expression of regard toward interpersonally
vulnerable partners is a normative belief. That is, do people think
others in general walk on eggshells around insecure and vulnerable
individuals? We expected that people do think this, regardless of
whether they themselves tend to be secure or insecure in relationships. In Studies 2A and 2B, we tested effects of knowledge that
one has expressed vulnerabilities on reflected appraisals of vulnerability and in turn authenticity doubts, controlling for individual
differences in self-esteem (Study 2A) and attachment-related anxiety (Study 2B). In Study 3, we examined effects of authenticity
doubts on perceived rejection in romantic and nonromantic relationships, controlling for individual differences in self-esteem. In
Study 4, we tested the effects implied by our model using longitudinal data and examined effects after controlling for individual
differences in self-esteem and the partner’s appraisals of vulnerability, authenticity, and regard. In Study 5, we tested one aspect of
the model using an experimental methodology, expecting to find
effects of experimentally manipulated reflected appraisals of vulnerability on doubts about the authenticity of a new relationship
partner’s expressions of emotion.

Study 1: Do People Think Others Walk on Eggshells
Around Vulnerable Individuals?
Our model presumes people believe that expressions of regard
toward those who are especially insecure and emotionally vulnerable to rejection lack authenticity. This should be the case regardless of whether people themselves tend to be vulnerable (i.e., low
self-esteem). Thus, before testing the specific paths of the model in
Figure 1, in Study 1, we tested whether people do associate
interpersonal vulnerability with partners walking on eggshells.

LEMAY AND CLARK

424
Method
Participants

One hundred and fifty-four participants (128 women, 24 men, 2
who did not report their gender; M age ⫽ 32 years) completed an
electronic survey in exchange for entry into a $100 raffle.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Measures and Procedure
Participants completed all measures in the order presented below.
Open-ended descriptions of reactions to an interpersonally vulnerable individual. Participants read the following description of
an individual who is especially insecure and emotionally vulnerable in regard to interpersonal acceptance:
Suppose that there is a person who appears to be very insecure. He or
she appears to worry about what other people think about him/her.
He/she often “reads into things,” thinking that other people see him or
her negatively when they actually might not. His/her feelings are
easily hurt and he/she often gets angry or upset with others.

Then, they provided written responses to the prompts “In your own
words, please describe how most people would act around such a
person” and “Why do you think people act this way around this
type of individual?”
Perceptions of general authenticity with a vulnerable individual. Participants read the description presented above and completed a 10-item measure assessing their perceptions of others’
authenticity with this individual using 7-point response scales (1 ⫽
strongly disagree; 7 ⫽ strongly agree). The items included five
that assessed authentic responses (i.e., “People would freely express any negative thoughts they have about this person,” “People
would freely give this person negative feedback or criticism,”
“People would be honest about how positively they view this
person,” “People would not worry about upsetting this person,”
and “People would not really think twice about what they say to
this person”) and five that assessed inauthentic responses (“People
would hide any negative thoughts they have about this person,”
“People would be reluctant to give this person negative feedback
or criticism,” “People would pretend that they view this person
more positively than they actually do,” “People would be cautious
about upsetting this person,” and “People would be overly careful
not to say anything that would upset this person”). The order of
items was determined randomly for each participant. Responses to
items were averaged to create authentic responding (␣ ⫽ .68) and
inauthentic responding (␣ ⫽ .81) indices.
Perceptions of general authenticity with a secure individual.
Participants were asked to imagine a secure individual using the
following instructions:
Suppose that there is a person who appears to be very confident. He
or she does not appear to be overly concerned about what other people
think about him/her. He/she tends to assume that other people see
him/her positively. He/she tends to not let what other people say
bother him/her.

Then, participants completed the same five authentic items (␣ ⫽
.79) and five inauthentic items (␣ ⫽ .81) described above.
Perceptions of specific authenticity with vulnerable individuals.
We also included measures to assess the perceived likelihood of
specific authentic and inauthentic responses in specific situations.

Participants read the following three scenarios depicting interactions with interpersonally vulnerable individuals: “Imagine that
someone is very sensitive about his/her appearance. On one particular day, this person doesn’t look all that attractive”; “Imagine
that someone is very sensitive about whether or not other people
like him/her. This person tells a joke that is not very funny”; and
“Imagine that someone is very sensitive about whether or not other
people like him/her. This person says something that offends
his/her friend.” For each scenario, two potential responses of the
interaction partner were provided, one that was authentic and
negative and the other that was inauthentic and more positive.
Participants indicated the likelihood of an authentic response (i.e.,
“His/her boyfriend/girlfriend tells the truth and tells him/her that
he/she doesn’t look attractive,” “His/her friend doesn’t laugh,” and
“The friend tells this person that he/she was upset,” respectively)
and an inauthentic response (i.e., “His/her boyfriend/girlfriend lies
and tells him/her that he/she looks attractive,” “His/her friend
forces a laugh, pretending that it was funny,” and “The friend says
nothing to this person about the incident,” respectively) using
4-point rating scales (1 ⫽ very unlikely; 2 ⫽ unlikely; 3 ⫽ likely;
4 ⫽ very likely). Whether the authentic or inauthentic response was
presented first was randomly determined for each participant and
scenario.
Perceptions of specific authenticity with secure individuals.
The same scenarios as described above were presented again,
except that the individual was depicted as secure (i.e., “Imagine
that someone is not overly concerned about his/her appearance,”
“Imagine that someone is not very worried about what other
people think of him/her,” and “Imagine that someone is not overly
concerned about what other people think of him/her,” respectively). Participants then completed the items described above
assessing their perceived likelihood of authentic and inauthentic
responses.
Self-esteem. Participants completed the Rosenberg (1965)
Self-Esteem Scale using 6-point response scales (1 ⫽ strongly
disagree; 6 ⫽ strongly agree; ␣ ⫽ .90).

Results and Discussion
Open-Ended Responses
Two coders who were unaware of the hypotheses coded the
open-ended responses for the presence of two theoretically relevant types of responses—feigning positivity and caution. Feigning
positivity was defined as statements reflecting a belief that people
are overly polite, nice, or complimentary to the vulnerable individual. Caution was defined as statements reflecting a belief that
people are cautious about upsetting the vulnerable individual or
tailor their communications in such a way as to avoid upsetting the
individual. For purposes of comparison, two other types of responses—support and avoidance—also were tallied. These were
chosen because other theoretical perspectives suggest that they
also may be common reactions to a partner’s insecurity (Clark &
Mills, 1993; Collins & Feeney, 2000; Coyne, 1976). Support was
defined as statements reflecting a belief that people would provide
help or desire to help the insecure person, including behavior (e.g.,
trying to help the person with his or her insecurity, providing
reassurance), motivation (i.e., a desire to help the person or a
concern for the other’s welfare), and emotion (i.e., feeling sym-

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

pathetic or empathic). Avoidance was defined as statements positing that others would avoid interaction or intimacy with the
individual. These categories were not exclusive; a participant’s
response could be coded as indicating more than one type of
reaction. Intercoder reliability was moderate to substantial for
feigning positivity (percent agreement ⫽ .85; Cohen’s ⌲ ⫽ .43),
caution (percent agreement ⫽ .85; Cohen’s ⌲ ⫽ .78), avoidance
(percent agreement ⫽ .88; Cohen’s ⌲ ⫽ .81), and support (percent
agreement ⫽ .84; Cohen’s ⌲ ⫽ .57). The coders subsequently
discussed and reconciled their disagreements.
As expected, a large proportion of participants (45%) freely
indicated that people would behave in a cautious manner around
the vulnerable individual. A smaller proportion (18%) freely indicated that people would feign positive sentiment. Many participants (50%) also claimed that others would desire to avoid the
insecure individual, and a smaller proportion (21%) indicated that
people would be supportive. Thus, cautious responding was perceived to be a common reaction to insecurity, just as common as
the outright avoidance emphasized in other models of reactions to
insecure and vulnerable individuals (e.g., Coyne, 1976; Downey et
al., 1998; Joiner, Metalsky, et al., 1999). Examples of cautious
responses include “Would be overly nice to the person so they
would not get upset”; “I think most people would be extra careful
around this person, as if they were walking on eggshells. I think
they would treat this person with ‘kid gloves’”; “I think most
people would tend to either ‘tip-toe’ around someone like this,
trying not to upset them OR be frustrated and just ignore that
aspect of the person”; “I would probably act very diplomatically
and make a point to choose my words very carefully”; “Most
people will treat the person in the same way as one would treat a
child- lightly”; and “Most people would be nervous—afraid of
doing or saying the wrong thing and ‘setting him/her off.’”
A limitation to these data is that most participants provided only
one response, likely the most accessible response. Thus, the openended response format may have underestimated the degree to
which people expect inauthentic responses. Results from analyses
of rating scale data, described next, are not subject to this limitation.

Rating Scale Responses
Differences in general authenticity. A repeated measures analysis of variance (ANOVA) compared response indices (authentic
vs. inauthentic) as a function of type of partner (vulnerable vs.
secure). A response main effect, F(1, 146) ⫽ 23.54, p ⬍ .001,
indicating that participants perceived inauthentic responses as
more likely than authentic responses, was qualified by the expected Response ⫻ Partner interaction, F(1, 146) ⫽ 166.86, p ⬍
.001, ␩2 ⫽ .53. The pattern of means is displayed in Figure 2.
Follow-up repeated measures ANOVAs revealed that, with vulnerable partners, authentic responding (M ⫽ 2.90) was judged to
be less likely than inauthentic responding (M ⫽ 5.10), F(1, 153) ⫽
200.57, p ⬍ .001, ␩2 ⫽ .57, whereas, with secure partners, authentic responding (M ⫽ 4.57) was judged to be more likely than
inauthentic responding (M ⫽ 3.41), F(1, 146) ⫽ 40.47, p ⬍ .001,
␩2 ⫽ .22. Authentic responding also was judged as significantly
more likely with a secure partner than with a vulnerable partner,
F(1, 146) ⫽ 157.31, p ⬍ .001, ␩2 ⫽ .52, whereas inauthentic
responding was judged to be more likely with a vulnerable partner

Likelihood

HOW EXPRESSING INSECURITIES PERPETUATES THEM

425

7

Inauthentic responding

6

Authentic responding

5
4
3
2
1
Vulnerable

Secure
Interaction Partner

Figure 2. Perceived likelihood of general authentic and inauthentic responding as a function of interaction partner (Study 1).

than with a secure partner, F(1, 147) ⫽ 138.07, p ⬍ .001, ␩2 ⫽
.48.
Differences in specific authenticity. A 2 (type of response:
authentic vs. inauthentic) ⫻ 2 (interaction partner: vulnerable
versus secure) ⫻ 3 (scenario: attractiveness, joke, offense) repeated measures ANOVA compared the perceived likelihood of
authentic and inauthentic responses across the specific scenarios as
a function of interaction partner. The pattern of responses for each
scenario is depicted in Figure 3.
The expected Type of Response ⫻ Interaction Partner interaction, F(1, 134) ⫽ 116.11, p ⬍ .001, ␩2 ⫽ .46, qualified a response
main effect, F(1, 134) ⫽ 6.84, p ⬍ .05 (which indicated slightly
greater perceived likelihood of inauthentic responses). Follow-up
repeated measures ANOVAs compared the likelihood of authentic
and inauthentic responses for each type of interaction partner. For
vulnerable interaction partners, the inauthentic response was perceived to be more likely (M ⫽ 2.88) than the authentic response
(M ⫽ 2.21), F(1, 143) ⫽ 113.48, p ⬍ .001, ␩2 ⫽ .44. For secure
interaction partners, the authentic response was perceived to be
more likely (M ⫽ 2.76) than the inauthentic response (M ⫽ 2.39),
F(1, 139) ⫽ 24.31, p ⬍ .001, ␩2 ⫽ .15. Another set of repeated
measures ANOVAs compared the perceived likelihood of each
type of response across the two interaction partners. Inauthentic
responses were judged to be more likely when with a vulnerable
partner than when with a secure partner, F(1, 139) ⫽ 73.49, p ⬍
.001, ␩2 ⫽ .35, whereas authentic responses were judged to be
more likely when with a secure partner than when with a vulnerable partner, F(1, 135) ⫽ 117.81, p ⬍ .001, ␩2 ⫽ .47.
The three-way Interaction Partner ⫻ Type of Response ⫻ Type
of Scenario interaction was not significant ( p ⫽ .12), suggesting
that this pattern pertained to all three of the situations. Indeed, the
Type of Response ⫻ Interaction Partner two-way interaction was
significant in an analysis of each situation: attractiveness situation,
F(1, 140) ⫽ 95.31, p ⬍ .001; joke situation, F(1, 139) ⫽ 75.37,
p ⬍ .001; and offense situation, F(1, 139) ⫽ 45.44, p ⬍ .001.
Moderation by self-esteem? We retested the ANOVAs described above after including self-esteem as a main effect (a
continuous covariate) and as a moderator of all of the other effects.
Self-esteem did not moderate the Response ⫻ Partner interaction
predicting general authenticity ( p ⫽ .45). Self-esteem also did not
significantly moderate effects in the specific scenario analysis
( ps ⬎ .20), and self-esteem was not correlated with any of the
open-ended responses ( ps ⬎ .31).

LEMAY AND CLARK

426

Likelihood

4

Studies 2A and 2B: Expression and Reflected Appraisals
of Vulnerability Predict Authenticity Doubts

Attrativeness Scenario
Inauthentic response
Authentic response

3

2

1
Vulnerable

Secure

Likelihood

4

Joke Scenario

3

2

1
Vulnerable

4

Method

Secure

Interaction Partner

Likelihood

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Interaction Partner

Study 1 revealed that people tend to expect expressions of
regard toward vulnerable individuals to lack authenticity. Our
model posits that these expectations are applied to existing relationships when people believe that they have expressed their
insecurity and vulnerability to partners. That is, when people
believe that they have expressed a high degree of insecurity and
vulnerability to partners, they tend to believe that they are viewed
as especially vulnerable, volatile, and insecure by the partner (Path
b in Figure 1). These reflected appraisals of vulnerability then
render these expectations or prototypes relevant to interpreting the
partner’s behavior, stirring doubts about the authenticity of the
partner’s expressions of regard (Path c in Figure 1). We expect
these effects even after controlling for individual differences in
trait insecurity. In Study 2A, we tested these predictions using
reports of romantic and nonromantic relationships while controlling for trait self-esteem. In Study 2B, we controlled for
attachment-related anxiety—that is, individual differences in worries about abandonment and rejection from close relationship
partners (e.g., Bartholomew & Horowitz, 1991; Collins & Read,
1990).

Participants and Procedure

Offense Scenario

3

2

1
Vulnerable

Secure

Interaction Partner
Figure 3. Perceived likelihood of specific authentic and inauthentic responses as a function of interaction partner (Study 1).

These results support the idea that walking on eggshells is part
of people’s prototypes of interactions with vulnerable people.
People appear to believe that others are less willing to express
negative thoughts and feelings and are more likely to feign positive
thoughts and feelings to especially interpersonally insecure and
vulnerable people than to secure people. This was the case using
both abstract measures of responding and perceived likelihood of
providing specific forms of authentic and inauthentic responses in
specific situations. These beliefs were held by people with low and
high self-esteem, suggesting that people believe that others walk
on eggshells and sugarcoat their responses around interpersonally
vulnerable individuals regardless of their own tendencies for interpersonal vulnerability and insecurity.1

Study 2A. Two hundred and seventeen participants (49 men,
163 women, 5 who did not report their gender; M age ⫽ 25 years)
completed an electronic survey in exchange for entry in a $50
raffle. They completed the survey regarding their romantic relationship partner (n ⫽ 152) if they were currently involved in a
romantic relationship or regarding a close friend (n ⫽ 65) if they
were not currently romantically involved.
Study 2B. One hundred and thirty-five college students enrolled in an introductory course on psychology (50 men, 85
women; M age ⫽ 20 years) opted to complete an electronic survey
to receive credit for a course assignment. Participants completed
measures in regard to a current romantic partner or a past romantic
partner if they ever had a romantic relationship and in regard to a
current or past close friend if they were not ever romantically
involved. Given that the measures assess beliefs about a particular
partner’s current thoughts and behaviors, analyses are based on
responses of those participants (30 men, 60 women) who completed the measures in regard to a current romantic partner (n ⫽
56) or a current friend (n ⫽ 34).

Measures
Participants completed the following measures in the order
presented.
1
Additional analyses examined the moderating effect of gender. Gender
did not moderate any of the effects in analyses of general authenticity or
specific situations ( ps ⬎ .17). Chi-square analyses revealed that openended caution, feigning positivity, and support responses did not vary as a
function of gender ( ps ⬎ .36). Avoidance did vary as a function of gender,
␹2(1, N ⫽ 152) ⫽ 9.70, p ⬍ .01. Only 21% of the men reported that others
would respond with avoidance, compared with 56% of the women.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

HOW EXPRESSING INSECURITIES PERPETUATES THEM

Self-esteem (Study 2A). Participants completed the Rosenberg
(1965) Self-Esteem Scale using 6-point response scales (1 ⫽
strongly disagree; 6 ⫽ strongly agree; ␣ ⫽ .92).
Expressions of vulnerability. Participants completed a 5-item
measure assessing knowledge of their prior expressions of vulnerability and insecurity to the relationship partner they identified.
Two items assessed expressions of negative emotion (i.e., “I have
frequently expressed hurt or angry feelings toward this person,”
and “I have often acted upset or angry toward this person because
of something he/she did or said”); two assessed knowledge of
reassurance seeking (i.e., “I often ask this person how he/she truly
feels about me,” and “I frequently seek reassurance from this
person as to whether he/she really cares about me”), adapted from
the reassurance-seeking subscale of the Depressive Interpersonal
Relationships Inventory (Joiner & Metalsky, 2001); and one assessed general expression of vulnerability (i.e., “I have often
reacted to this person in ways that suggest that I am sensitive about
rejection”). Items were completed on 6-point response scales (1 ⫽
strongly disagree; 6 ⫽ strongly agree; Study 2A ␣ ⫽ .82; Study
2B ␣ ⫽ .86).2
Reflected appraisals of vulnerability. Participants completed a
3-item measure assessing their beliefs that the partner views them
as vulnerable and insecure (i.e., “This person thinks I am easily
upset with him/her,” “This person thinks I am sensitive to his/her
opinions of me,” and “This person views me as vulnerable or
easily hurt”) using 6-point response scales (1 ⫽ strongly disagree;
6 ⫽ strongly agree; Study 2A ␣ ⫽ .80; Study 2B ␣ ⫽ .72).
Authenticity doubts. Participants completed a 4-item measure
of authenticity doubts. Items assessed hiding negative regard
(“This person censors his/her thoughts and feelings in order to
avoid hurting my feelings,” and “This person walks on eggshells
[is overly cautious] around me”) and feigning positive regard
(“This person exaggerates how positively he thinks or feels about
me,” and “This person often says things he/she doesn’t mean in
order to make me feel good”) using 6-point response scales (1 ⫽
strongly disagree; 6 ⫽ strongly agree; Study 2A ␣ ⫽ .79; Study
2B ␣ ⫽ .79).3
Attachment-related anxiety (Study 2B). Participants completed
a shortened version of the Experiences in Close Relationships—
Revised Adult Attachment Questionnaire (Fraley, Waller, & Brennan, 2000). This scale measures attachment-related anxiety (tendencies to worry about rejection and abandonment) and
attachment-related avoidance (discomfort with closeness and intimacy). The five items with responses that were most weakly
related to their respective subscale during scale development (see
Tables 2 and 3 in Fraley et al., 2000) were eliminated from the
questionnaire. The remaining items were completed in a random
order. The anxiety measure exhibited adequate internal consistency in Study 2B (anxiety ␣ ⫽ .95). The avoidance scale was not
used in the current analyses (but it should be noted that controlling
for avoidance did not eliminate any of the effects predicted by our
model). Instructions prompted participants to respond according to
how they feel about close relationships in general.

Results and Discussion
Predicting Reflected Appraisals of Vulnerability
In Study 2A, self-esteem was correlated with expressions of
vulnerability (r ⫽ ⫺.28, p ⬍ .001) and reflected appraisals of

427

vulnerability (r ⫽ ⫺.34, p ⬍ .001). Similarly, in Study 2B,
attachment-related anxiety was correlated with expressions of vulnerability (r ⫽ .47, p ⬍ .001) and reflected appraisals of vulnerability (r ⫽ .59, p ⬍ .001). According to our model, when people
believe they have expressed vulnerabilities in the past, they will
believe that they are viewed as vulnerable, independently of these
individual differences (Path b in Figure 1). Indeed, in Study 2A,
regressing reflected appraisals of vulnerability on both self-esteem
and expressions of vulnerability revealed independent effects of
expressions of vulnerability (␤ ⫽ .70, p ⬍ .001) and self-esteem
(␤ ⫽ ⫺.15, p ⬍ .01) on reflected appraisals of vulnerability
(expression of vulnerability, Cohen’s f 2 ⫽ 1.05). Likewise, in
Study 2B, regressing reflected appraisals of vulnerability on both
attachment-related anxiety and expressions of vulnerability revealed independent effects of expressions of vulnerability (␤ ⫽
.52, p ⬍ .001) and attachment-related anxiety (␤ ⫽ .35, p ⬍ .001;
expression of vulnerability, f 2 ⫽ 0.46). Thus, when people believed that they expressed vulnerabilities, they believed that their
partner saw them as vulnerable (Path b in Figure 1), independently
of individual differences in self-esteem and attachment-related
anxiety.

Predicting Authenticity Doubts
Self-esteem (Study 2A) and attachment-related anxiety (Study
2B) were correlated with authenticity doubts (r ⫽ ⫺.37, p ⬍ .001,
and r ⫽ .27, p ⬍ .05, respectively). We expected that reflected
appraisals of vulnerability would predict authenticity doubts independently of these individual differences (Path c in Figure 1). In
addition, our model suggests an indirect effect in which those who
2
Preliminary analyses using separate indices of expressing negative
emotion and reassurance seeking produced highly similar results. In Study
2A, self-esteem was correlated with each index (r ⫽ ⫺.17, p ⬍ .05, and
r ⫽ ⫺.24, p ⬍ .001, respectively), and effects of both indices on authenticity doubts were mediated by reflected appraisals of vulnerability (negative emotion 3 reflected appraisals of vulnerability 3 authenticity
doubts, Sobel z ⫽ 4.76, p ⬍ .001; reassurance seeking 3 reflected
appraisals of vulnerability 3 authenticity doubts, Sobel z ⫽ 4.32, p ⬍
.001). In Study 2B, attachment-related anxiety was correlated with each
index (r ⫽ .37, p ⬍ .001, and r ⫽ .52, p ⬍ .001, respectively), and effects
of both indices on authenticity doubts were mediated by reflected appraisals of vulnerability (negative emotion 3 reflected appraisals of vulnerability 3 authenticity doubts, Sobel z ⫽ 3.67, p ⬍ .001; reassurance seeking
3 reflected appraisals of vulnerability 3 authenticity doubts, Sobel z ⫽
3.18, p ⬍ .01).
3
Preliminary analyses using separate indices of hiding negative regard
and feigning positive regard produced an identical pattern of results. In
Study 2A, self-esteem was correlated with both indices (r ⫽ ⫺.29, p ⬍
.001, and r ⫽ ⫺.38, p ⬍ .001, respectively), and reflected appraisals of
vulnerability mediated the effect of expression of vulnerability on each
index (expression of vulnerability 3 reflected appraisals of vulnerability
3 hiding negative regard, Sobel z ⫽ 3.62, p ⬍ .001; expression of
vulnerability 3 reflected appraisals of vulnerability 3 feigning positive
regard, Sobel z ⫽ 3.44, p ⬍ .001). In Study 2B, attachment-related anxiety
was correlated with each index (r ⫽ .29, p ⬍ .001, and r ⫽ .19, p ⫽ .078,
respectively), and reflected appraisals of vulnerability mediated the effect
of expression of vulnerability on each index (expression of vulnerability 3
reflected appraisals of vulnerability 3 hiding negative regard, Sobel z ⫽
3.71, p ⬍ .001; expression of vulnerability 3 reflected appraisals of
vulnerability 3 feigning positive regard, Sobel z ⫽ 2.87, p ⬍ .01).

LEMAY AND CLARK

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

428

express vulnerabilities come to doubt authenticity because they
believe that they are viewed as vulnerable and that partners have
adapted by walking on eggshells (combination of Paths b and c in
Figure 1). A hierarchical regression analysis tested effects of
expressions of vulnerability on authenticity doubts in Step 1. We
then added reflected appraisals of vulnerability in Step 2. Selfesteem or attachment-related anxiety was controlled in both steps.
Results are displayed in Table 1.
In both studies, expressions of vulnerability predicted increased
authenticity doubts in the first step (Study 2A expression of
vulnerability, f 2 ⫽ 0.15; Study 2B expression of vulnerability,
f 2 ⫽ 0.03). These effects were eliminated after controlling for
reflected appraisals of vulnerability in the second step ( ps ⬎ .29;
Study 2A reflected appraisals of vulnerability, f 2 ⫽ 0.09; Study
2B reflected appraisals of vulnerability, f 2 ⫽ 0.25). Sobel tests
confirmed the significance of the indirect effects of expressing
vulnerability on authenticity doubts via reflected appraisals of
vulnerability (Study 2A, z ⫽ 4.05, p ⬍ .001; Study 2B, z ⫽ 3.66,
p ⬍ .001). These results suggest that, when people expressed
heightened vulnerability and insecurity to a partner, they doubted
the partner’s authenticity because they thought that the partner
viewed them as vulnerable and insecure (a combination of Paths b and
c in Figure 1).4

Alternative Models
We tested an alternative mediation model in which we switched
the putative mediator (reflected appraisals of vulnerability) and
outcome (authenticity doubts). This alternative model posits that
authenticity doubts account for the relationship between expressions of vulnerability and reflected appraisals of vulnerability. This
may be the case, for example, if authenticity doubts are an indicator of general insecurity in the relationship and this insecurity
acts as a third variable that predicts both expressions of vulnerability and reflected appraisals of vulnerability. In conducting these
analyses, we also continued to control for self-esteem (in Study
2A) and attachment anxiety (in Study 2B). Contrary to this alternative model, expressions of vulnerability continued to predict
reflected appraisals of vulnerability when controlling for authenticity doubts (Study 2A, ␤ ⫽ .63, p ⬍ .001; Study 2B, ␤ ⫽ .46,
p ⬍ .001). Hence, only the theorized mediation model was supported; whereas reflected appraisals of vulnerability explained the
link between prior expressions of vulnerability and authenticity
Table 1
Effects of Trait Insecurity (Self-Esteem or Attachment-Related
Anxiety), Expressions of Vulnerability, and Reflected Appraisals
of Vulnerability on Authenticity Doubts
Predictor
Study 2A
Self-esteem
Expressions of vulnerability
Reflected appraisals of vulnerability
Study 2B
Attachment-related anxiety
Expressions of vulnerability
Reflected appraisals of vulnerability
†

p ⬍ .10.

***

p ⬍ .001.

Model 1

Model 2

⫺.28
.35***
—

⫺.22
.09
.37***

.18
.20†
—

⫺.05
⫺.13
.63***

doubts, authenticity doubts did not explain the link between expressions of vulnerability and reflected appraisals of vulnerability.

Study 3: Authenticity Doubts Contribute to Perceived
Rejection
Our model posits that doubts about the authenticity of a partner’s expressions of regard undermine relational security (Path d in
Figure 1). They do so, according to our model, because they
encourage people who harbor such doubts to infer more rejection
than is expressed and to discount expressions of acceptance. In
Study 3, we tested the link between authenticity doubts and perceived rejection while controlling for individual differences in
self-esteem.

Method
Participants and Procedure
Seventy participants (13 men, 57 women; M age ⫽ 29 years)
completed an electronic survey in exchange for entry in a $50
raffle. They completed the survey regarding their romantic relationship partner (n ⫽ 50) if they were currently involved in a
romantic relationship or regarding a close friend (n ⫽ 19) if they
were not currently romantically involved. One participant did not
indicate whether the partner was romantic or nonromantic.

Measures
Participants completed the following measures in the order
presented.
General authenticity doubts. Participants completed a 4-item
measure of general authenticity doubts. Items assessed hiding
negative regard (“This person censors his/her thoughts and feelings in order to avoid hurting my feelings,” and “This person walks
on eggshells [is overly cautious] around me”) and feigning positive
regard (“This person exaggerates how positively he thinks or feels
about me,” and “This person often says things he/she doesn’t mean
in order to make me feel good”) using 10-point response scales
(1 ⫽ strongly disagree; 10 ⫽ strongly agree; ␣ ⫽ .81).5
Perceived rejection. Using 10-point response scales (1 ⫽
strongly disagree; 10 ⫽ strongly agree), participants completed
three items assessing perceived rejection (i.e., “This person rejects
me,” “This person thinks I have a number of significant flaws,”
and “This person dislikes me”). Three additional items assessed
perceived acceptance (i.e., “This person accepts me,” “This person
thinks I have a number of good qualities,” and “This person likes
me”). Responses to the acceptance items were reverse scored and
averaged with the perceived rejection items (␣ ⫽ .81). Thus,
4

***

***

Relationship type, gender, and trait insecurity (self-esteem or
attachment-related anxiety) did not consistently moderate our model paths
across our studies. Thus, they are not discussed further.
5
Preliminary analyses using separate indices of hiding negative regard
and feigning positive regard produced an identical pattern of results;
self-esteem was correlated with each index (r ⫽ ⫺.27, p ⬍ .05, and r ⫽
⫺.48, p ⬍ .001, respectively), and each index predicted perceived rejection
independently of self-esteem (␤ ⫽ .21, p ⫽ .07, and ␤ ⫽ .32, p ⬍ .001,
respectively).

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

HOW EXPRESSING INSECURITIES PERPETUATES THEM

higher scores indicate more perceived rejection and less perceived
acceptance.
Perceived honesty of specific positive feedback. Participants
were asked to imagine that their relationship partner “said something that hinted that he or she thought each of the following things
about you” and to indicate their perceptions of their partner’s
honesty using 6-point response scales (1 ⫽ extremely dishonest;
6 ⫽ extremely honest). Responses to four types of positive feedback (“That he/she enjoyed your company,” “That you looked
attractive,” “That you were intelligent,” and “That you were
funny”) were averaged to create an index of perceived honesty of
specific positive feedback (␣ ⫽ .68).
Self-esteem. Participants completed the Rosenberg (1965)
Self-Esteem Scale. The 10 items were answered on 6-point response scales (1 ⫽ strongly disagree; 6 ⫽ strongly agree; ␣ ⫽
.89).

Results and Discussion
Self-esteem was correlated with perceived rejection (r ⫽ ⫺.46,
p ⬍ .001), general authenticity doubts (r ⫽ ⫺.42, p ⬍ .001), and
perceived honesty of specific positive feedback (r ⫽ .63, p ⬍
.001). We expected that authenticity doubts would predict perceived rejection independently of the effect of self-esteem (Path d
in Figure 1). Indeed, when we regressed perceived rejection on
both self-esteem and general authenticity doubts, general authenticity doubts predicted perceived rejection (␤ ⫽ .29, p ⬍ .05)
independently of self-esteem, which was also predictive (␤ ⫽
⫺.34, p ⬍ .01; general authenticity doubts, Cohen’s f 2 ⫽ 0.10).
Likewise, when we regressed perceived rejection on both selfesteem and perceived honesty of specific positive feedback, the
perceived honesty measure predicted perceived rejection (␤ ⫽
⫺.44, p ⬍ .01), whereas self-esteem did not ( p ⫽ .17; perceived
honesty, Cohen’s f 2 ⫽ 0.16).
This study suggests that authenticity doubts predict insecurity
regarding the partner’s acceptance independently of the effects of
self-esteem (Path d in Figure 1).

Study 4: Dyadic and Longitudinal Effects
Study 4 was a dyadic longitudinal friendship study that extended
the prior studies in three ways. First, we assessed each partner’s
regard and care for the other partner. This allowed us to test
whether authenticity doubts predict underestimation of the partner’s regard and care (which we expected; Path d in Figure 1). This
also allowed us to test whether the subjective perceptions of
negative regard and lack of care that are thought to occur as a
result of authenticity doubts (Path d in Figure 1) in turn predict
derogation of and reduced care for the partner. Derogating and
distancing from a partner as a result of relationship threats appear
to reflect attempts to protect the self from impending rejection.
They co-occur with behavioral forms of distancing, such as responding in a hostile, unsupportive manner (Murray et al., 2006).
This distancing response to the insecurity brought about by authenticity doubts may be one means by which relationship-specific
insecurity feeds back to affect subjectively felt expressions of
vulnerability that initiate our hypothesized cycle (Path a in Figure
1). We controlled for trait self-esteem when testing these links.

429

Second, the longitudinal aspect of Study 4 permitted a test of the
cyclical aspect of our model. We expected that the reduced security in the partner’s acceptance presumably brought about by
authenticity doubts (Path d in Figure 1) would be carried into the
future, perpetuating the cycle by promoting subsequent expressions of vulnerability (Path a in Figure 1). In turn, these subsequent
expressions of vulnerability should predict temporal increases in
reflected appraisals of vulnerability and authenticity doubts.
Third, in addition to assessing each partner’s authenticity
doubts, we assessed each partner’s appraisals of the other’s vulnerability and each partner’s felt authenticity of his or her own
expressions. This allowed us to test our expectations that those
who think that they have expressed vulnerabilities believe that they
are viewed as vulnerable independently of the partner’s actual
views (Path b in Figure 1) and that those who believe they are
viewed as vulnerable subjectively construct an inauthentic partner
independently of the partner’s reported authenticity (Path c in
Figure 1).

Method
Participants and Procedure
Sixty dyads were recruited for a study on friendship from local
electronic bulletin boards and newspaper advertisements. Five
dyads were dating couples. The remaining 55 dyads were platonic
friends. The dyads included 32 female pairs, 10 male pairs, and 18
mixed-sex pairs. Ages ranged from 17 to 45 years (M ⫽ 21 years).
Most participants (n ⫽ 116) were college students. Upon recruitment, they completed a series of questionnaires (T1). Approximately 5 months later (M ⫽ 139 days), 90 of the initial 121
participants (38 intact dyads) completed all follow-up measures
reported below (T2).6

Measures
Expressions of vulnerability, reflected appraisals of vulnerability, and authenticity doubts. The same measures described in
Study 3 were used, and items were answered on 6-point response
scales (1 ⫽ strongly disagree; 6 ⫽ strongly agree). The 12 items
across the three measures were presented in a computer-generated
random order that varied across participants (expression of vulnerability, T1 ␣ ⫽ .83, T2 ␣ ⫽ .87; reflected appraisals of
vulnerability, T1 ␣ ⫽ .61, T2 ␣ ⫽ .70; authenticity doubts, T1 ␣ ⫽
.67, T2 ␣ ⫽ .82).
Partner’s appraisals of vulnerability and partner’s authenticity.
Using identical response scales, participants completed an analogous measure assessing their perceptions of their friend’s interpersonal vulnerability (i.e., “This person is easily upset with me,”
“This person is sensitive to my opinions of him/her,” and “This
person is vulnerable or easily hurt.”; T1 ␣ ⫽ .67, T2 ␣ ⫽ .73) and
an analogous measure assessing the authenticity of their own
expressions of regard (i.e., “I walk on eggshells [am overly cau6

t tests comparing participants who dropped out of the study at T2 with
those who remained in the study on all of the T1 measures produced no
significant effects ( ps ⬎ .40). Hence, we are reasonably confident that
selective attrition did not bias our T2 sample. Data from this study were
also published in Lemay and Clark (in press), although the particular
effects presented in the current article are unique.

LEMAY AND CLARK

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

430

tious] around this person,” “I frequently exaggerate how positively
I think or feel toward this person,” “I often say things I don’t mean
in order to make this person feel good,” and “I censor my thoughts
and feelings in order to avoid hurting this person’s feelings”; T1
␣ ⫽ .83, T2 ␣ ⫽ .90). These items were presented in a random
order that varied across participants.
Self-esteem. Participants completed the Rosenberg (1965)
Self-Esteem Scale using identical response scales (T1 ␣ ⫽ .92, T2
␣ ⫽ .90).
Perceived caring and regard. Participants indicated their perception of the friend’s regard for them on a series of traits taken
from the Interpersonal Qualities Scale (Murray, Holmes, & Griffin, 1996). The traits included nine positive traits (witty and
humorous, considerate, kind and affectionate, forgiving, warm,
open and disclosing, understanding, patient, tolerant and accepting) and seven negative traits (critical and judgmental, thoughtless,
controlling and dominant, complaining, distant, emotional or
moody, demanding), presented in a random order. Using 9-point
response scales (1 ⫽ not at all characteristic; 9 ⫽ completely
characteristic) participants indicated the extent to which they
believed that their friend saw each trait as characteristic of them
(T1 ␣ ⫽ .84, T2 ␣ ⫽ .83). Perceived partner caring was measured
by four items (i.e., “This person cares about me,” “This person
would give up a lot to help me,” “This person would go out of
his/her way to help me,” and “This person doesn’t care about me”)
answered on 6-point response scales (1 ⫽ strongly disagree; 6 ⫽
strongly agree; T1 ␣ ⫽ .84, T2 ␣ ⫽ .85). Most analyses using each
of these variables produced similar results (except where noted),
and responses to these two measures were moderately to highly
correlated (T1 r ⫽ .38, T2 r ⫽ .55). To simplify presentation of
results, they were standardized and averaged to create composite
indices of perceived caring and regard (i.e., relationship security)
for use in most analyses.
Caring and regard for partner. Participants also indicated
their perceptions of the partner on the same 16 traits using the
same 9-point response scales (T1 ␣ ⫽ .82, T2 ␣ ⫽ .85), and they
completed an analogous measure of their own caring for the
partner (e.g., “I care about this person”; T1 ␣ ⫽ .86, T2 ␣ ⫽ .81).
Responses to the two measures were highly correlated (T1 r ⫽ .45,
T2 r ⫽ .56), and analyses using each of these variables produced
similar results. Thus, responses were standardized and averaged to
create composite indices of own regard and caring for partner for
use in most analyses.

Results and Discussion
Path Analysis Strategy
A series of path analyses (tested with the SAS CALIS procedure; Hatcher, 1994; SAS Institute, 2002) was used to test our
primary hypotheses. Responses were standardized to facilitate
comparison of the effects of variables measured on different scales
(and doing so did not affect any of our conclusions). First we
present concurrent analyses testing hypothesized links among expressions of vulnerability, reflected appraisals of vulnerability,
authenticity doubts, underestimation of the partner’s caring and
regard, and caring and regard for the partner. Second, we tested
longitudinal predictions. Third, we tested whether effects of expressions of vulnerability on reflected appraisals of vulnerability

are independent of the partner’s actual appraisals of vulnerability
and whether reflected appraisals of vulnerability in turn predict
authenticity doubts independently of the partner’s reported authenticity.
The current dyadic dataset involves interchangeable dyad members. That is, there is no consistent, unequivocal way to separate the
two members of each dyad. We adopted recommendations by Olsen
and Kenny (2006) to test path models involving interchangeable
dyads. Specifically, we constrained intercepts, paths, variances, error
terms, and any modeled within-member and across-member covariances to be equal for the two members. This appropriately models the
members as interchangeable. We initially modeled covariances of the
same variable across partners to account for dyadic nonindependence
of responses, although insignificant covariances were deleted from the
final models (noted as we proceed).
As further suggested by Olsen and Kenny (2006), fit indices
were modified to remove from the final estimate of fit the influence of modeling interchangeability. The traditional model chisquare test implicitly compares the specified model with a saturated model, one in which all variances and covariances are
modeled. An insignificant chi-square typically indicates that the fit
of the specified model does not differ significantly from the
observed variance– covariance matrix. For interchangeable dyads,
the comparison is changed from the observed sample variance–
covariance matrix to a variance– covariance matrix with equality
constraints on all covariances, variances, and intercepts across
partners (and modeling dyadic interdependence by including
cross-partner covariances), termed the I-SAT model (for interchangeable saturated model) by Olsen and Kenny. The modified
model chi-square, ␹2⬘, is obtained by subtracting the chi-square for
the I-SAT model from the chi-square of the tested model, and the
modified model degrees of freedom, df ⬘, are similarly obtained by
subtracting the degrees of freedom of the I-SAT model from the
degrees of freedom of the tested model. Hence, this modified
chi-square test essentially removes from the fit estimate the effect
of modeling interchangeability, and it does so by comparing the
specified model with the saturated model after parameters have
been constrained to be equal across partners in both models. An
insignificant ␹2⬘ suggests that the estimated model adequately fits
the equality-constrained data. Likewise, the root-mean-square error of approximation (RMSEA), a measure of model misspecification, must be adjusted for our modeling of dyadic interchangeability by reducing the model ␹2 and df upon which the test is
based by the ␹2 and df of I-SAT. The modified index, RMSEA⬘,
suggests a close approximate fit of the estimated model to the
equality-constrained observed data if it is less than or equal to .05,
and it suggests a reasonable fit if it is less than or equal to .08 (see
Kline, 2005). ␹2⬘ and df ⬘ also must be used when computing
incremental fit indices that compare the specified model with an
independence model specifying no relations among model variables. The independence model also must be revised. For instance,
the modified Tucker-Lewis Index (TLI⬘; also called the nonnormed fit index) compares the fit of the tested model (reduced by
the I-SAT model) with the fit of an adjusted independence model,
which specifies no relations among model variables but constrains
intercepts and variances to be equal across partners (also reduced
by the I-SAT model). A TLI⬘ greater than or equal to .90 suggests
a good fit of the model (see Kline, 2005). This index adds a penalty

HOW EXPRESSING INSECURITIES PERPETUATES THEM

431

Self-esteem

†

***

-.32

-.14 /ns

/-.26*

Expresson of .57
vulnerability

***

***

/ .66

**

-.28 / -.18

†

*

.20 / .29

**

-.24

/ ns
Perceived
***
***
**
**
Reflected .27** / .59*** Authenticity
Caring
and
regard
.73
/
.75
-.26 / -.34
partner's caring
appraisals of
for partner
doubts
and regard
vulnerability
***

.37
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

***

/ .19

*

Partner's caring and
regard
Figure 4. Results of path analyses testing concurrent predictions (Study 4). Standardized parameters for Time
1 effects are shown on the left of the slash, and standardized parameters for Time 2 effects are shown on the right
of the slash. Time 1 dyad N ⫽ 60. Time 2 dyad N ⫽ 37. †p ⬍ .10. *p ⬍ .05. **p ⬍ .01. ***p ⬍ .001.

for model complexity. (See Olsen & Kenny, 2006, for computational details.7)

Concurrent Test of the Model
Figure 4 displays results of path analyses testing concurrent
predictions. We included paths from self-esteem to all model
variables to control for effects of self-esteem, and we modeled
perceived caring and regard as having some degree of truth,
predicted by the partner’s caring and regard. Controlling for this
degree of truth allowed us to test our expectation that authenticity
doubts predict subjective perceptions of the partner’s caring and
regard independently of the partner’s actual caring and regard. We
also modeled an effect of perceived partner caring and regard on
own caring and regard for the partner to test whether the relational
insecurity that is presumably brought about by authenticity doubts
in turn evokes a distancing response and reduces one’s own
responsiveness to the partner (see Murray et al., 2006).8
The effects were consistent with our model at both assessment
waves. Participants’ beliefs that they had expressed vulnerability
predicted their reflected appraisals of vulnerability (Path b in Figure
1). That is, when people believed they had expressed vulnerability and
insecurity to a partner in the past, they believed the partner viewed
them as vulnerable and insecure. In turn, these reflected appraisals of
vulnerability predicted authenticity doubts (Path c in Figure 1). In
other words, those who believed that they were viewed as vulnerable
and insecure thought that partners were walking on eggshells around
them through hiding negative regard and feigning positive regard.
Authenticity doubts in turn predicted insecurity in the partner’s caring
and regard (Path d in Figure 1), suggesting that, through discounting
expressions of acceptance and inferring more rejection than is expressed, these doubts undermine security in the partner’s affections.
This was the case after controlling for trait self-esteem, which had
independent effects. This was also the case after controlling for the
partner’s reported caring and regard, suggesting that authenticity
doubts lead to unwarranted insecurity in the partner’s caring and
regard, independently of the partner’s claimed caring and regard. In
addition to being predicted by authenticity doubts, perceived caring
and regard also was predicted by the partner’s reported caring and

regard, suggesting that insecurity also held some degree of truth (see
Lemay et al., 2007; Murray et al., 2000). Moreover, doubts about the
partner’s caring and regard in turn predicted one’s own reduced caring
and regard for the partner, suggesting that the undermining of security
due to authenticity doubts might further promote the reactivity to
insecurities that initiated the process (Path a in Figure 1). This model
was an acceptable fit to the data at T1 (TLI⬘ ⫽ .98, RMSEA⬘ ⫽ .05,
␹2⬘ ⫽ 26.28, df ⬘ ⫽ 23, ns) and at T2 (TLI⬘ ⫽ .99, RMSEA⬘ ⫽ .04,
␹2⬘ ⫽ 25.15, df ⬘ ⫽ 24, ns).9
7

Our sample size may be considered somewhat small in light of conventional recommendations for path analysis (see Kline, 2005). With smaller
samples, chi-square tests may lack the power needed to reject the specified
model, although the other goodness-of-fit tests are less affected by sample size
(Bentler, 1990; Hu & Bentler, 1998). Moreover, because each dyad contributes
two observations to the modeled effects, the true sample size is somewhere
between the number of dyads and the number of individuals (Olsen & Kenny,
2006). For the interchangeable dyadic analyses that we used, Olsen and Kenny
(2006) recommended that, at minimum, the number of dyads plus one should
be twice as great as the number of variables in the model. Our models meet this
criterion. Reassuringly, a series of multilevel models (modeling the two
individuals nested within dyads) testing each path in isolation produced similar
support for our model.
8
Although it is not immediately apparent, the model displayed in
Figure 4 posits a feedback loop (one’s perceptions of the partner’s caring
and regard affect one’s own caring and regard for the partner, which is
detected by the partner, which affects the partner’s reciprocation of caring
and regard, which affects one’s perceptions of the partner’s caring and
regard). We followed recommendations for testing nonrecursive models
(Berry, 1984; Kline, 2005), including initially modeling the four covariances of the error terms of the four variables in the loop. In both T1 and T2
models, these covariances were not significant and were dropped.
9
Several insignificant cross-partner covariances (initially included to
test dyadic nonindependence of all model variables) have been deleted
from the models presented in Figure 4. In the T1 model, these include
reflected appraisals of vulnerability, perceived caring and regard, caring
and regard for partner, and self-esteem. In the T2 model, they include
authenticity doubts and perceived caring and regard. The T1 model also
estimates the residual covariance between expression of vulnerability and
authenticity doubts.

LEMAY AND CLARK

432

T1 Expression .60
of vulnerability

***

**
T1 Reflected
***
.39 T1 Authenticity -.35
appraisals of
doubts
vulnerability

.65

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

.72

***

T2 Perceived -.18
regard

*

.52

***
***

T2 Expression .47
of vulnerability

***

T1 Perceived
regard
†

.17

T2 Reflected
***
.54
T2 Authenticity
appraisals of
doubts
vulnerability

Figure 5. Results of path analysis testing longitudinal predictions (Study 4). N ⫽ 37. T1 ⫽ Time 1; T2 ⫽ Time
2. †p ⬍ .10. *p ⬍ .05. **p ⬍ .01. ***p ⬍ .001.

Longitudinal Analyses
Additional models tested predictions regarding longitudinal effects. Specifically, we predicted that the reduced security in the
partner’s acceptance brought about by authenticity doubts (Path d
in Figure 1) would be carried into the future, predicting temporal
increases in expressions of vulnerability (Path a in Figure 1),
which should in turn predict temporal increases in reflected appraisals of vulnerability (Path b in Figure 1) and, in turn, authenticity doubts (Path c in Figure 1). We also modeled all T2 variables
as predicted by their T1 assessments. Doing so renders T2 variables reflective of residualized temporal change.
Results of the analysis involving the perceived regard measure
are displayed in Figure 5.10 The pattern of effects regarding
relations among T1 variables is similar to that displayed in Figure 4. In addition, Figure 5 suggests that the T1 insecurity about
the partner’s regard that was predicted by authenticity doubts in
turn predicted T2 insecurity, which then predicted residual change
in expressions of vulnerability (Path a in Figure 1). These increased expressions in turn predicted temporal increases in reflected appraisals of vulnerability (Path b in Figure 1), which in
turn predicted increases in authenticity doubts (Path c in Figure 1).
This model adequately fit the data (TLI⬘ ⫽ .95, RMSEA⬘ ⫽ .086,
␹2⬘ ⫽ 62.16, df ⬘ ⫽ 49, ns).11 These results suggest a cyclical
process in which insecurity about the partner’s regard is both an
indirect consequence of expressing insecurity (through effects on
reflected appraisals of vulnerability and, in turn, authenticity
doubts) and a cause of subsequent expressions of insecurity.

Mediation by Partner’s Appraisals of Vulnerability and
Authenticity?
We conducted a series of multilevel models (tested using the
SAS MIXED procedure; SAS Institute, 2002; Singer, 1998), which
modeled two partners as nested within dyads and intercepts as
randomly varying across dyads (see Campbell & Kashy, 2002;
Kenny, Kashy, & Cook, 2006), to test whether the paths predicted
by our models were mediated by partner’s appraisals of vulnerability and authenticity. We continued to control for trait selfesteem in these analyses.
We regressed the partner’s appraisals of one’s vulnerability on
one’s expressions of vulnerability to test whether those who expressed vulnerabilities had partners who viewed them as vulnerable. At both assessment waves, significant positive effects of

expressing vulnerabilities suggested that partners did appraise such
individuals as vulnerable, T1 ␤ ⫽ .35, t(117) ⫽ 3.80, p ⬍ .001; T2
␤ ⫽ .33, t(71) ⫽ 2.82, p ⬍ .01. These effects suggest that those
who claimed to express vulnerabilities did have partners who
detected those vulnerabilities to some degree. Next, we regressed
own reflected appraisals of vulnerability on own expressions of
vulnerability and the partner’s appraisals of vulnerability to test
whether the partner’s appraisals mediated the link between own
expressions and own reflected appraisals. This mediation was not
found; one’s own felt expressions of vulnerability remained a
strong and significant predictor of reflected appraisals of vulnerability at both assessment waves, T1 ␤ ⫽ .50, t(116) ⫽ 6.47, p ⬍
.001; T2 ␤ ⫽ .66, t(70) ⫽ 7.18, p ⬍ .001; although the partner’s
appraisal of vulnerability also was significant at T1, ␤ ⫽ .20,
t(116) ⫽ 2.65, p ⬍ .01, but not at T2 ( p ⫽ .23). These findings
support our model’s assumption that reflected appraisals of vulnerability can originate from one’s own felt expressions of vulnerability independently of the partner’s appraisals of vulnerability.
Next, we regressed the partner’s claimed authenticity on one’s
expressions of vulnerability to test whether those who expressed
vulnerability had partners who claimed to be less authentic. Expression of vulnerability did not predict the partner’s authenticity
at T1 ( p ⫽ .26) or at T2 ( p ⫽ .49). We also regressed the partner’s
authenticity on one’s reflected appraisals of vulnerability. This
effect also was not significant at T1 ( p ⫽ .14) but was significant
at T2, ␤ ⫽ .42, t(71) ⫽ 3.81, p ⬍ .001, suggesting that those who
10
The longitudinal model in Figure 5 includes only the perceived regard
measure and not the perceived caring and regard composite index. Analyses involving the composite index produced an effect of T2 perceived
caring and regard on T2 expressions of vulnerability that was in the
predicted direction but did not reach conventional levels of significance
(␤ ⫽ ⫺.12, two-tailed p ⫽ .16, one-tailed p ⫽ .08). This was due to a null
effect of perceived partner caring on expressions of vulnerability, which
might suggest that some degree of perceived caring is necessary before one
expresses vulnerabilities. All other effects in the model that included the
composite measure are similar to the effects displayed in Figure 5.
11
Several insignificant cross-partner covariances (initially included to
model dyadic interdependence) have been deleted from the final model
displayed in Figure 5. These include T1 reflected appraisals of vulnerability, T1 authenticity doubts, T2 authenticity doubts, and T2 perceived
regard. In addition, this model estimated the residual covariance between
T1 expressions of vulnerability and T1 authenticity doubts.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

HOW EXPRESSING INSECURITIES PERPETUATES THEM

thought they were viewed as vulnerable had partners who claimed
to be less authentic at T2. However, the partner’s authenticity did
not explain the effect of reflected appraisals of vulnerability on
authenticity doubts. That is, when we regressed one’s authenticity
doubts on one’s reflected appraisals of vulnerability and the partner’s authenticity, reflected appraisals of vulnerability strongly
predicted authenticity doubts, T1 ␤ ⫽ .41, t(115) ⫽ 4.98, p ⬍
.001; T2 ␤ ⫽ .63, t(70) ⫽ 6.30, p ⬍ .001; whereas the partner’s
authenticity did not (T1 p ⫽ .39, T2 p ⫽ .29). These analyses
suggest two distinct biases that are consistent with our model.
First, those who claimed to express vulnerabilities appeared to
believe that they were viewed as vulnerable independently of
whether partners actually viewed them as vulnerable. Second,
those who thought they were viewed as vulnerable appeared to
doubt partners’ authenticity independently of whether partners
actually claimed to be inauthentic.

Alternative Models
We tested several alternative mediation models. First, we tested
six alternative models by changing the modeled sequence. That is,
we switched the position of expression of vulnerability, reflected
appraisals of vulnerability, authenticity doubts, or perceived care
and regard with one of these other variables. All other aspects of
the models remained the same as the models depicted in Figure 4;
we continued to model the effect of perceived care and regard on
care and regard for partner, the effect of partner’s care and regard
on perceived care and regard, the effect of self-esteem on all
variables, and all residual covariances that were estimated in the
original models. The models did not adequately fit the data after
switching expression of vulnerability and reflected appraisals of
vulnerability (T1, ␹2⬘ ⫽ 46.90, df ⬘ ⫽ 23, p ⬍ .01; T2, ␹2⬘ ⫽
36.31, df ⬘ ⫽ 22, p ⬍ .05), after switching expression of vulnerability and authenticity doubts (T1, ␹2⬘ ⫽ 46.07, df ⬘ ⫽ 23, p ⬍
.01; T2, ␹2⬘ ⫽ 38.78, df ⬘ ⫽ 22, p ⬍ .05), after switching expression of vulnerability and perceived care and regard (T1, ␹2⬘ ⫽
54.27, df ⬘ ⫽ 23, p ⬍ .001; T2, ␹2⬘ ⫽ 54.05, df ⬘ ⫽ 22, p ⬍ .001),
after switching reflected appraisals of vulnerability and authenticity doubts (T1, ␹2⬘ ⫽ 64.53, df ⬘ ⫽ 23, p ⬍ .001; T2, ␹2⬘ ⫽ 61.57,
df ⬘ ⫽ 22, p ⬍ .001), after switching reflected appraisals of
vulnerability and perceived care and regard (T1, ␹2⬘ ⫽ 64.43, df ⬘
⫽ 23, p ⬍ .001; T2, ␹2⬘ ⫽ 71.24, df ⬘ ⫽ 22, p ⬍ .001), and after
switching authenticity doubts and perceived care and regard (T1,
␹2⬘ ⫽ 38.72, df ⬘ ⫽ 23, p ⬍ .05; T2, ␹2⬘ ⫽ 56.54, df ⬘ ⫽ 22, p ⬍
.001). Hence, these alternative models could not account for the
observed (equality-constrained) covariance matrix.
Second, we tested a more parsimonious model positing that the
effects that support our model (those linking expressions of vulnerability to reflected appraisals of vulnerability, reflected appraisals to authenticity doubts, and authenticity doubts to perceived
caring and regard) are all simply explained by shared variance with
perceived care and regard. In other words, as direct consequences
of relational insecurity, people might express vulnerability, think
they are viewed as insecure, and doubt authenticity. In this model,
perceived care and regard is specified as a predictor of expressions
of vulnerability, reflected appraisals of vulnerability, and authenticity doubts, and we eliminated paths directly linking these three
latter variables. All other aspects of the model remained the same
as described above. This model was not a good fit to the data at T1

433

(␹2⬘ ⫽ 85.48, df ⬘ ⫽ 23, p ⬍ .001) or at T2 (␹2⬘ ⫽ 96.20, df ⬘ ⫽
22, p ⬍ .001). Hence, it seems as if this more parsimonious model
positing that all effects are simply due to shared variance with
insecurity about the partner’s care and regard is not supported.
Finally, a problem with testing these alternative models is that
they eliminate several model paths simultaneously. As a result, the
poor-fitting alternative models do not necessarily indicate that
each model path is properly specified. To test whether the model
paths that are central to our theoretical model could be explained
by other variables in our model, we tested multilevel models in
which each critical model path was tested while controlling for
other model variables, whether theoretically upstream or theoretically downstream. Controlling for self-esteem, authenticity
doubts, and perceived caring and regard, expression of vulnerability predicted reflected appraisals of vulnerability, T1 ␤ ⫽ .48,
t(115) ⫽ 5.85, p ⬍ .001; T2 ␤ ⫽ .50, t(63) ⫽ 5.31, p ⬍ .001.
Controlling for self-esteem, expression of vulnerability, and perceived caring and regard, reflected appraisals of vulnerability
predicted authenticity doubts, T1 ␤ ⫽ .22, t(110) ⫽ 2.42, p ⬍ .05;
T2 ␤ ⫽ .47, t(66) ⫽ 3.96, p ⬍ .001. Controlling for self-esteem,
expression of vulnerability, and reflected appraisals of vulnerability, authenticity doubts predicted perceived caring and regard, T1
␤ ⫽ ⫺.19, t(110) ⫽ ⫺1.85, p ⫽ .07; T2 ␤ ⫽ ⫺.41, t(69) ⫽ ⫺3.06,
p ⬍ .01. Hence, even at the level of individual model paths,
alternative mediation models were not supported by the data. For
instance, it was not the case that insecurity about a partner’s caring
and regard explained the relation between expression of vulnerability and reflected appraisals of vulnerability or the relation between reflected appraisals of vulnerability and authenticity doubts.

Summary
This study provides additional support for our model. Independently of self-esteem, when people claimed to have expressed their
interpersonal vulnerabilities and insecurities to their friends, they
believed that their friends viewed them as easily hurt and volatile
(Path b in Figure 1). In turn, the belief that one was viewed in this
way predicted doubts about the authenticity of the friend’s expressions of regard and acceptance (Path c in Figure 1). In turn, these
authenticity doubts predicted insecurity about the friend’s caring
and regard (Path d in Figure 1). Importantly, these effects were
observed even when controlling for the partner’s appraisals of
vulnerability, authenticity, caring, and regard, suggesting the operation of cognitive processes linking expressions of vulnerability
to authenticity doubts and insecurity, as posited by our model.
Doubts about the partner’s regard in turn appeared to perpetuate
the doubter’s reactivity that initiated the process. That is, these
doubts about the partner’s regard predicted derogation of and
reduced care for the partner and predicted subsequent insecurity
about the partner’s regard, which in turn predicted temporal
changes in expressions of vulnerabilities (Path a in Figure 1).
These changes in expressions of vulnerabilities then predicted
changes in reflected appraisals of vulnerabilities, which in turn
predicted changes in authenticity doubts. Such a pattern suggests a
cyclical process in which expressing heightened interpersonal vulnerability and insecurity is an indirect cause and direct consequence of felt relational insecurity.

LEMAY AND CLARK

434

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Study 5: Experimental Manipulation of Reflected
Appraisals of Interpersonal Vulnerability
The last study examined effects of experimentally manipulated
reflected appraisals of vulnerability on doubts about the authenticity of a new acquaintance’s emotional expression. Pataki and
Clark (2004) hypothesized and found evidence that people publicly express more happiness than they privately feel to unattractive targets and that unattractive targets are aware of this. They
posited that expressions of happiness ordinarily serve as expressions of social interest but that people may tailor these expressions
to avoid hurting others’ feelings. Moreover, as this is a normative
tendency, targets of these exaggerated expressions of happiness,
such as unattractive individuals, typically know that people tend to
do this and, consequently, discount the meaningfulness of these
expressions. We expected similar effects with reflected appraisals
of vulnerability—people induced to believe that another person
views them as especially insecure about and emotionally vulnerable to rejection should believe that the other expressed more
happiness than he or she felt (a specific authenticity doubt; Path c
in Figure 1).

Method
Overview
Participants were told that they would interact with another
participant (really a confederate) and that this other person would
be given information that may or may not be true about them
beforehand. After a 10-min interaction, some participants were
informed that the confederate had been told that the participant
was especially insecure and emotionally vulnerable to rejection;
some were not. We then measured participants’ perceptions of the
confederate’s authenticity of expressions of happiness during the
prior interaction.

Participants
One hundred and eighty-six participants (86 men, 98 women, 2
who did not report gender; M age ⫽ 22 years), primarily college
students, were recruited via campus advertisements, research experiment websites, and from a Psychology participant pool.

Procedure
As they arrived at the laboratory, participants walked by one of
three confederates (two women, one man) who was apparently
waiting in the hallway for an appointment. The experimenter
ushered the participant into a laboratory room and then provided a
cover story, explaining that the experiment was about how first
impressions can affect perceptions of social interactions, that the
participant would have a brief interaction with another participant
(really a confederate), and that the procedure required one of the
two participants to receive information about the other participant
before the interaction to examine the effects of first impressions.
The experimenter further explained to the true participant that,
because he or she was the first to arrive at that session, the other
participant (the confederate) would be the one to receive this
information and that this information may or may not be true of the
participant. The experimenter also added that, to preserve the

validity of the study, he could not disclose the details of the
information (to the true participant) until the interaction was over
but that he would be sure to explain the nature of the information
at that time. After assuring that participants understood this information, the experimenter left the room, ostensibly to wait for the
other participant and provide him or her the information. In reality,
the confederate was not given any information about the participant and was unaware of the experimental condition.
A few minutes later, the experimenter returned to the room and
ushered the confederate into a seat across from the participant. The
experimenter explained that the study was about how people
perceive their social interactions, that they would have a semistructured 10-min interaction, and that they then would go to
separate rooms to complete measures of their perceptions of the
interaction. After completing consent forms, participants completed a short questionnaire in which they provided demographic
information and responses to a self-esteem scale. The confederate
acted as if he or she also was completing the consent forms and
questionnaire.
Following this, the participant and confederate took part in the
Relationship Closeness Induction Task (RCIT), a 9-min guided
and timed interaction task designed to induce feelings of closeness
(Sedikides, Campbell, Reeder, & Elliot, 1999). The task consists of
three lists of questions presented on three separate pages. The
questions gradually become more personal, with questions regarding things such as name, age, and hometown appearing on the first
page, hobbies and personal goals on the second page, and childhood memories and emotional experiences on the third page.
Participants and confederates took turns asking and answering
each question. When they reached the time limit for the page, the
experimenter returned to the room to prompt them to turn to the
next page.
Once the participants were finished with the RCIT, the experimenter returned and explained that the interaction was over and
that now participants would go to separate rooms to complete a
survey assessing perceptions of the interaction. He then ushered
the confederate out of the room.
At this point, the procedure varied depending on random assignment to one of three experimental conditions. For participants
assigned to the no-information control condition (n ⫽ 62), the
experimenter returned and administered the final questionnaire
without saying anything about the information that had ostensibly
been given to the other participant before the interaction.
For those assigned to the reflected appraisals of vulnerability
condition (n ⫽ 63), the experimenter returned and explained that,
now that the interaction was over, he could describe the information that he had given the other participant before the interaction.
He then explained, “I told the other participant that you were
sensitive about what other people think about you, that you care a
lot about that sort of thing.” The experimenter then explained that
the other participant had read a memo conveying this same information and provided the participant with a copy of the memo. On
university letterhead, the memo read as follows:
Dear participant, you are about to interact with a very sensitive
person. Based on prior in-depth interviews and completion of personality inventories, it appears that the participant with whom you are
about to interact is extremely sensitive about how he/she comes across
to others. This person constantly worries about what other people
think, whether other people accept him/her, and whether other people

HOW EXPRESSING INSECURITIES PERPETUATES THEM

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

will want to start a friendship. This person tends to perceive signs of
rejection even in situations where people are accepting. In addition,
this person is easily hurt and angered by signs of rejection from others.
Sincerely, Research Staff.

The experimenter explained that the other participant was in a
room completing a survey assessing his or her perceptions of the
interaction. The experimenter added that he also wanted to assess
the (real) participant’s perceptions so that he could compare them
with the other participant’s responses. He then administered the
final questionnaire.
A second control condition also was administered to control for
other differences between the two conditions described above (n ⫽
61). For instance, factors such as activation of constructs related to
vulnerability, sensitivity, and insecurity; suspicion or demand due
to disclosure of information ostensibly given to the other participant; and a longer duration between the interaction and completion
of dependent measures might serve as alternative explanations of
our expected effect. Thus, we also desired to compare the vulnerable condition with an invulnerable condition that differed in terms
of the reflected appraisal but did not differ in terms of these other
factors. In addition, this condition allowed us to examine effects of
inducing reflected appraisals of invulnerability, but we did not
have strong predictions regarding such effects because participants
in the no-information condition likely assumed that they were not
viewed as vulnerable, which is what participants in the invulnerable condition were explicitly told. The experimenter explained
that he had told the other participant before the interaction that
“you were not sensitive to what other people think about you, that
you could really care less about that sort of thing.” The memo read
as follows:
You are about to interact with a very insensitive person. Based on
prior in-depth interviews and completion of personality inventories, it
appears that the participant with whom you are about to interact is
extremely insensitive to social cues. This person is oblivious to what
others are thinking, is largely unaware of social norms, and cares little
about appearance. This person tends to be unaware of signs of
rejection and acceptance from others. In addition, this person appears
to be unaffected by what other people think, has little ability to take
others’ perspectives on things, and does not understand others’ feelings.

Following completion of the final questionnaire, all participants
were debriefed. One participant (in the reflected appraisals of
vulnerability condition) expressed suspicion regarding the cover
story. Preliminary analyses revealed that exclusion of this participant’s responses did not alter the pattern of results. Thus, his
responses were included in the analyses presented below.

Measures
Self-esteem. Participants completed the Rosenberg (1965)
Self-Esteem Scale using 4-point response scales (1 ⫽ strongly
disagree; 4 ⫽ strongly agree; ␣ ⫽ .90).
Expressed and felt happiness. Embedded in the final questionnaire was an item assessing the confederate’s expression of happiness (“How much happiness did the participant in this study
express toward you?”), followed by an item assessing the confederate’s privately felt happiness (“How much happiness did the
participant in this study really feel toward you?”). Participants

435

completed these items on 7-point response scales (1 ⫽ very little;
7 ⫽ a lot).
Evaluation of vulnerable and invulnerable feedback. All participants were provided with the vulnerable and invulnerable descriptions in the memos and evaluated each on 7-point response
scales (1 ⫽ extremely negative; 7 ⫽ extremely positive).

Results and Discussion
A 2 ⫻ 2 mixed ANOVA compared differences in ratings of
expressed and felt happiness (within-subjects) as a function of
experimental condition (vulnerable condition vs. the two control
conditions combined). A significant main effect for type of rating,
F(1, 182) ⫽ 47.65, p ⬍ .001, suggesting that, on average, participants viewed the confederate as expressing more happiness than
was truly felt, was qualified by the Type of Rating ⫻ Condition
interaction, F(1, 182) ⫽ 5.24, p ⬍ .05, ␩2 ⫽ .03. As expected, in
the vulnerable condition, participants believed that the confederate’s expressions (M ⫽ 5.14) were happier than the confederate’s
private feelings (M ⫽ 4.7), t(62) ⫽ 5.50, p ⬍ .001, d ⫽ .46. This
tendency was reduced in the control conditions (Ms ⫽ 4.8 and 4.6,
respectively), t(120) ⫽ 4.01, p ⬍ .001, d ⫽ .23. Thus, consistent
with our expectations (Path c in Figure 1), participants perceived
the confederate’s expressions of happiness as less authentic when
they were told, after the interaction, that the confederate had been
informed beforehand that participants were especially vulnerable
to rejection.12
This result is particularly impressive given that (a) participants
could not use reflected appraisals of vulnerability to bias their
online perceptions during the interaction but instead had to retrospect in light of information received after the interaction, (b)
reflected appraisals of vulnerability were communicated via a third
party, and (c) these manipulated reflected appraisals competed
with any behavior expressed by the confederate that may have
communicated authenticity. Indeed, many other studies suggest
that, when causes are presented sequentially, people tend to anchor
their judgments on the initial cause and fail to sufficiently discount
the initial cause when presented with the alternative cause (see
McClure, 1998, for a review). Our effects might have been stronger if participants held reflected appraisals during encoding of the
other’s behavior, if reflected appraisals were derived naturally
from one’s self-perceived vulnerability-expressive behavior, and if
the other’s behavior was constrained so that authenticity was more
12
Additional analyses also compared the vulnerable condition with each
of the other conditions. The interaction was marginal for the analysis
comparing the vulnerable condition with the no-information control condition, F(1, 122) ⫽ 3.47, p ⫽ .065. The interaction was significant for the
analysis comparing the vulnerable condition with the invulnerable condition, F(1, 121) ⫽ 4.22, p ⫽ .042. With one-tailed tests, both effects would
be significant. The obtained interaction pattern was the same in both of
these analyses. Additional mixed ANOVAs comparing the invulnerable
condition with the other two conditions or with only the control condition
produced no significant interactions ( ps ⬎ .21). These results suggest that
it was participants’ beliefs that they were viewed as vulnerable, rather than
factors such as activation of insecurity-related constructs, differences in
time to complete dependent measures, or suspicion due to receiving information about what the confederate ostensibly had been told, that caused
authenticity doubts.

LEMAY AND CLARK

436

ambiguous.13 However, as the manipulation was administered
after the interaction, our design eliminates the alternative explanation that participants in the reflected appraisals of vulnerability
condition elicited inauthentic expressions of happiness from the
confederate.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

General Discussion
Why do some individuals chronically feel insecure about a
particular partner’s regard and acceptance? We have proposed that
individuals’ own reactions to their insecurity initiate cognitions
that perpetuate that insecurity. Specifically, our model posits that,
when people feel insecure about a partner’s regard and acceptance,
they often judge their own prior behavior as having communicated
insecurity and emotional vulnerability to the partner. Consequently, they come to believe that they are viewed as especially
insecure and vulnerable. Then, due to shared beliefs that people
walk on eggshells around insecure, vulnerable others, such reflected appraisals of vulnerability elicit doubts about the authenticity of the partner’s expressions of regard and acceptance. Once
authenticity is doubted, positive expressions are discounted, negative expressions are augmented, and hidden negative regard is
inferred even when partners are accepting and actually hold positive regard. This results in continued insecurity in the relationship.
Hence, one reason why some people chronically feel insecure in
particular relationships is because their own prior reactions to their
insecurity have undermined their capacity to trust the partner’s
expressions of acceptance and positive regard.
Study 1 demonstrated that people believe expressions of regard
toward interpersonally insecure and vulnerable others are relatively inauthentic. That is, walking on eggshells does appear to be
a common perception of what people do when confronted with
especially vulnerable and insecure interaction partners. Studies
2A, 2B, and 4 suggest that, when people believe they have expressed vulnerabilities to a romantic partner or friend, they believe
they are viewed as especially vulnerable, which in turn predicts
their suspicion regarding the authenticity of the other’s expressions
of positive regard and acceptance (Paths b and c in Figure 1).
Independently of self-esteem and attachment anxiety, reflected
appraisals of vulnerability, induced by one’s own prior expressions
of vulnerability, appear to turn the expectation of walking on
eggshells around vulnerable and insecure individuals into suspicion about the partner’s behavior.
Study 4 suggests that this process can operate independently of
the partner’s appraisals of vulnerability and reported authenticity.
Study 5 provides additional evidence for the role of subjective
reflected appraisals of vulnerability in producing authenticity
doubts, showing that directly inducing these reflected appraisals
caused participants to doubt a new acquaintance’s expressions of
happiness despite the fact that the new acquaintance actually did
not view them as especially vulnerable. According to our model,
egocentric biases to focus on one’s own behavior and internal
experiences and to believe that others make more dispositional
attributions for one’s behavior than they actually do cause individuals who feel especially insecure in a relationship to believe
that they are viewed as vulnerable by partners independently of
whether partners actually view them this way. Once this belief is
in place, the corresponding belief that others walk on eggshells
around vulnerable individuals (demonstrated in Study 1) incites

doubts about the authenticity of the partner’s expressions of regard, even if partners have not responded by delivering inauthentic
feedback.
In turn, Studies 3 and 4 showed that these doubts about the
authenticity of a romantic partner’s or a friend’s regard predicted
more pessimistic perceptions of the other’s regard and caring (Path
d in Figure 1). In Study 4, this effect was obtained after controlling
for the friend’s reports of regard and caring, suggesting that
authenticity doubts initiate cognitive processes that undermine felt
interpersonal security independently of partners’ actual thoughts
and feelings. According to our model, an individual’s authenticity
doubts create a disconnection between the partner’s valuing and
accepting behavior and the individual’s inferences of value and
acceptance. In particular, authenticity doubts may result in a downward estimation of the partner’s true regard and acceptance, as
expressions of positive regard are presumed to be exaggerated and
clandestine rejection can be inferred from the partner’s presumed
cautious orientation. Thus, our findings suggest that one way in
which people unwittingly remain insecure about a partner’s acceptance is that they behave in ways that ultimately and subjectively
invalidate the partner’s expressions of positive regard and foster
perceptions of negative regard despite the lack of confirmatory
behavioral evidence and even in the presence of contradictory
evidence.
Although our studies support our model, we are not positing that
our theorized predictors of each model variable are the only
predictors. For instance, in addition to insecurity about a partner’s
regard and acceptance, perhaps insecure self-esteem engenders
reactivity to esteem-threatening events (Kernis, 2003), which independently predicts reflected appraisals of vulnerability and, in
turn, authenticity doubts. We found evidence for our model while
controlling for low self-esteem, and insecurity about a partner’s
regard in particular did predict expressions of vulnerability and
was predicted by authenticity doubts, but it may be the case that
our model applies to events that threaten self-esteem just as well as
it does to events that threaten relational security. Indeed, these two
types of events seem to be highly confounded (MacDonald, Saltzman, & Leary, 2003; Murray et al., 1998, 2001). That is, events
that threaten self-esteem tend to be events that threaten relational
security and vice versa.

Why Do Individuals Perpetuate Their Insecurity?
We certainly do not believe that people consciously wish to
undermine their own security. Rather, when people are insecure
about a partner’s acceptance, they are likely unaware of how their
behavioral responses can perpetuate their insecurity. During social
interaction, those who feel insecure about a partner’s acceptance
and regard may often focus on present needs for security or
13

Additional analyses examined whether self-esteem, gender, or confederate further moderated the two-way interaction. They did not ( ps ⬎
.81). Additional mixed ANOVAs found no effects of condition on evaluation of the vulnerable or invulnerable feedback, more positive evaluations
of the vulnerable feedback than of the invulnerable feedback in all conditions, and the same interaction after controlling for evaluation of the
vulnerable feedback and its interaction with expressed versus felt happiness. These results suggest that negative evaluation of the feedback involved in the reflected appraisals of vulnerability manipulation did not
account for the effects.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

HOW EXPRESSING INSECURITIES PERPETUATES THEM

self-protection. They may protect the self from perceived impending rejection by derogating the partner and the relationship (Murray et al., 2006) or seek reassurance to alleviate self-doubt (Coyne,
1999; Joiner, Metalsky, et al., 1999). In addition, vulnerabilities
may be strategically expressed in an effort to suppress a partner’s
negative feedback, especially when one anticipates negative feedback and fears that it will be painful.
However, whatever emotional gratification is conferred by such
strategies may be only temporary. Responding to insecurity with
use of these short-term emotion-regulation strategies may increase
the probability of experiencing threats that create a need for similar
regulation responses in the future. That is, by lashing out in
response to perceived rejection or by seeming especially desirous
of or dependent on a partner’s approval, people cannot be sure
whether subsequent apologies, affections, or approval reflect the
partner’s private sentiments. Burdened with this distrust, similar
threats and insecurities are all the more forthcoming. Indeed, Study
4 showed that initial insecurity about a partner’s regard, which was
predicted by authenticity doubts, in turn predicted derogation of
the partner and indirectly predicted later expressions of vulnerability, suggesting that authenticity doubts contribute to the experience and expression of insecurity that initially produced them
(Path a in Figure 1). Seeking self-protection by derogating or
punishing a partner (see Murray et al., 2006) or seeking interpersonal security by asking for reassurance, accompanied by inadvertent expressions of heightened insecurity and vulnerability to rejection, appears to be an example of a self-defeating tendency to
prioritize short-term emotion regulation over self-regulation that
promotes long-term interpersonal well-being (see Baumeister &
Scher, 1988, for a review).

Should Insecurities Be Suppressed?
Our model and findings suggest that expressing interpersonal
insecurities can perpetuate them. Does this mean that those who
feel insecure within particular relationships should avoid disclosing their concerns to their partners? We believe the answer is no.
Suppressing insecurities could result in those who are insecure
never testing the reality of their partner’s affections. In addition, by
suggesting to the self that the partner cannot be trusted and by not
sharing important aspects of the self, the suppression likely undermines feelings of intimacy. Other theoretical perspectives and
findings suggest that self-disclosure, especially disclosure of emotions, enhances felt intimacy (Laurenceau, Barrett, & Pietromonaco, 1998; Reis & Shaver, 1988) and that emotional disclosure is
more likely, is more desired, and elicits helping more in communal
relationships than in noncommunal relationships (Clark, Fitness, &
Brissette, 2000; Clark, Ouellette, Powell, & Milberg, 1987; Clark
& Taraban, 1991). Suppressing insecurities and vulnerabilities,
then, may deprive both partners of an intimate and optimally
communal relationship. Moreover, actively attempting to suppress
insecurities may have the ironic effect of making them all the more
salient (Wenzlaff & Wegner, 2000).
Instead, the cognitive consequences of expressions may need to
be changed. Self-disclosure builds communal and intimate relationships when partners respond to the disclosure in ways that
leave disclosers feeling valued and cared for (Reis & Shaver,
1988). We have argued that perceiving that one has expressed
vulnerabilities causes authenticity doubts that interfere with such

437

feelings. However, the cycle of insecurity perpetuation that we
have emphasized might be undermined by modifying the links
between disclosure and authenticity doubts. If this were possible,
those who express their vulnerabilities might be better able to
perceive their partners as responding supportively. An accumulation of such interactions may then reduce the experience of relationship insecurities and, consequently, their expression.
How might these links be changed? We have posited particular
cognitive distortions as mediating mechanisms. These distortions
include a tendency to believe that one’s behavior and internal
experiences are more observable than they are and a tendency to
exaggerate the extent to which others respond with dispositional
attributions. Indeed, beliefs about being perceived as vulnerable
largely accounted for the link between expressions of vulnerability
and authenticity doubts. Thus, altering these cognitive distortions
seems to be a promising strategy.
Moreover, this strategy appears possible. Savtisky et al. (2001)
argued that the illusion of transparency may be due to a focusing
illusion—the tendency to focus on specific stimuli and give undue
weight to other stimuli when making predictions. That is, people
mistakenly assume that their own behavior is just as salient to
observers as it is to the self. Manipulations designed to eliminate
this focusing illusion can change the way people believe they are
viewed by others. For example, the tendency to feel negatively
evaluated by others following public display of inadequacies or
social blunders was reduced by instructing participants to defocus—to consider the many factors that might affect the observer’s
evaluations (Savitsky et al., 2001, Studies 3 and 4). In addition,
relative to control participants, those who were informed about the
illusion of transparency—in this case, the tendency to overestimate
the extent to which others can observe one’s anxiety— gave better
speeches and appeared more relaxed both from their own perspective and from the audience’s perspective (Savitsky & Gilovich,
2003, Study 2). Perhaps those who are insecure about a partner’s
acceptance can learn to broaden their focus and consider the many
other factors that may determine whether partners perceive them as
excessively interpersonally vulnerable. This may convince them
that their interpersonal vulnerability is not as salient to their
partners as they have presumed.
Further in the posited cycle, perhaps insecure individuals can
learn to trust their partner’s expressions of acceptance and positive
regard despite the reflected appraisals of vulnerability. Although
walking on eggshells appears to be a widely held belief about how
people respond to others’ insecurity, there may be individual
differences. For example, people who are chronically attentive to
social cues appear better able to detect others’ ingratiating behavior (Jones & Baumeister, 1976). Such individuals are likely aware
of the situational factors that motivate deceptive social behavior.
Perhaps insecure individuals can learn to attend to and later remember cues suggesting the partner’s authenticity. For example,
they could take a partner’s willingness to sometimes behave badly
(i.e., selfishness, irritability) as evidence that their partners are
authentic, rather than presuming rejection and maintaining authenticity doubts. They also could view relationship longevity and the
partner’s tolerance of one’s transgressions as evidence that the
partner must truly accept the self and value the relationship. These
tactics also may involve a form of broadening one’s focus, actively
considering the partner’s motives for authentic responding (e.g.,
the partner’s desire for intimacy, the partner’s values, or the

438

LEMAY AND CLARK

partner’s desire to provide help through honest feedback) that may
be operating alongside the presumed motive to provide inauthentic
feedback.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Implications for Research on Relationship Security
Our model is distinct from other perspectives on the maintenance of insecurity. Prior perspectives have posited either a perceptual confirmation process biased by individual differences or a
behavioral confirmation process. A perceptual confirmation process occurs when prior expectations bias attention to and processing of social information in a manner that confirms those initial
expectations (Snyder & Stukas, 1999). Several models positing
that this type of bias is driven by individual differences have been
proposed and empirically supported. For example, the sociometer
model construes trait self-esteem as a barometer of one’s value as
a relationship partner over the long run (Leary & Baumeister,
2000). Moreover, because people with low self-esteem have a
history of rejection, they are thought to be particularly vigilant for
and likely to detect social rejection. Indeed, people with low
self-esteem tend to perceive others as less accepting than do people
with high self-esteem (Leary, Tambor, Terdal, & Downs, 1995;
Lemay & Ashmore, 2006; Srivastava & Beer, 2005), and they
substantially underestimate their romantic partner’s love and regard for them (Murray et al., 2000, 2001). Individual differences in
attachment-related anxiety and rejection sensitivity also have been
viewed as sources of bias in perceiving rejection (e.g., Collins,
1996; Downey & Feldman, 1996).
Other models have posited that insecurity is perpetuated through
behavioral confirmation, such that insecure individuals behave in
a manner that actually brings about rejection from relationship
partners. Doubting a dating partner’s regard, for example, predicts
temporal decreases in that partner’s trust and satisfaction (Murray
et al., 2000), and rejection-sensitive individuals have partners who
report less satisfaction and commitment and more anger following
conflict (Downey et al., 1998). Coyne’s (1976) interpersonal
model of depression similarly posits that depressed individuals’
excessive reassurance seeking is distressing to partners and may
cause them to reject depressed individuals.
Our model suggests another type of process that may perpetuate
insecurity. In particular, although individual differences in general
expectancies for rejection may predict felt insecurity and behavioral reactions to that insecurity, these reactions may exert effects
on subsequent feelings of security independently of those initial
expectancies and independently of the partner’s reactions. This
view is distinct from the individual-differences view in its emphasis on the biasing effects of one’s own behavior within particular
relationships. Moreover, our studies provide an empirical distinction; one’s own expressions of vulnerability and reflected appraisals of vulnerability predicted authenticity doubts, and authenticity
doubts predicted perceived rejection, independently of the general
expectations for rejection reflected in low self-esteem and
attachment-related anxiety. This view also is distinct from a behavioral confirmation view. Although both views emphasize the
role of behavior in perpetuating insecurity, our model suggests that
behavior may be a source of perceptual bias in addition to bringing
about actual rejection by a partner. Our findings that one’s own
expressions of vulnerability predicted authenticity doubts and per-

ceived rejection independently of the partner’s reactions support
this distinction, as does our experimental study.
The current research is just one example of how people’s own
interpersonal behaviors and their cognitions about their behaviors
can influence their felt security. Some of our other findings also fit
with this view—people induced to believe that they have not been
responsive to the needs of relationship partners and people who
chronically felt that they were not responsive perceived that their
relationship partners did not care for them (Lemay & Clark, in
press; Lemay et al., 2007) independently of their partners’ reports
of their actual caring and independently of depression, self-esteem,
and attachment-related anxiety and avoidance. That is, selfperceptions of one’s own communal behavior affected perceptions
of the other’s caring even after accounting for the effects predicted
by perceptual confirmation guided by individual differences and
behavioral confirmation. A full understanding of how security is
perpetuated may require use of several models, considering that
individual differences in expectations for rejection may exert a
direct bias on perceptions of rejection, that they may guide behavior that actually elicits rejection from others, and that they may
guide behavior that itself independently biases subsequent perceptions.
Although our model posits a normative relationship process that
is initiated by and perpetuates relationship-specific insecurity,
individual differences are likely to be important. Individual differences in proclivities to feel secure or insecure in relationships, such
as low self-esteem, attachment-related anxiety, or rejection sensitivity, do predict felt security in particular relationships. They also
likely predict reflected appraisals of vulnerability and authenticity
doubts. Hence, these individual differences may act as distal
predictors of any of our model components, which may then
trigger the normative, cyclical relationship process we have emphasized. For example, those with low self-esteem or attachment
anxiety may project their own insecurity onto the views they
believe their partners hold of them. Once they believe they are
viewed as highly insecure and vulnerable, the normative process
we have emphasized may become operative; they may discount the
partner’s expressions of positive regard, infer less positive regard
than is the case, and express this insecurity about the partner’s
regard to the partner, which only reaffirms their belief that they are
viewed as insecure. Indeed, in addition to finding evidence in
support for our normative process model, we also found that low
self-esteem and attachment anxiety predicted expressions of vulnerability and reflected appraisals of vulnerability. Low selfesteem also predicted authenticity doubts and insecurity about a
partner’s caring and regard. Hence, all else being equal, our
normative model may especially pertain to the relationship dynamics of those who tend to be insecure in relationships generally
because, through other processes not emphasized in the current
research, such individuals are especially likely to intensely and
frequently express vulnerabilities, believe they are viewed as vulnerable, and doubt authenticity. However, the process we have
emphasized may describe specific relationships involving individuals who nevertheless tend to be secure in their other relationships.

Conclusion
Although people strongly desire involvement in caring, stable
relationships, some individuals have difficulty maintaining their

HOW EXPRESSING INSECURITIES PERPETUATES THEM

confidence that particular partners value, accept, and care for them.
An important source of this difficulty may be the ways in which
they attempt to achieve these types of relationships. By seeking
security or self-protection in ways that express heightened vulnerabilities to rejection, they, at least in their own minds, have given
their partners reason to be inauthentic, which only causes them to
continue doubting their partners’ sentiments. In this way, reactions
to relationship threats in the present may impede relational security
and necessitate similar reactions in the future.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

References
Barry, R. A., Lakey, B., & Orehek, E. (2007). Links among attachment
dimensions, affect, the self, and perceived support for broadly generalized attachment styles and specific bonds. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 33, 340 –353.
Bartholomew, K., & Horowitz, L. M. (1991). Attachment styles among
young adults: A test of a four-category model. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 61, 226 –244.
Baumeister, R. F., & Leary, M. R. (1995). The need to belong: Desire for
interpersonal attachments as a fundamental human motivation. Psychological Bulletin, 117, 497–529.
Baumeister, R. F., & Scher, S. J. (1988). Self-defeating behavior patterns
among normal individuals: Review and analysis of common selfdestructive tendencies. Psychological Bulletin, 104, 3–22.
Bentler, P. M. (1990). Comparative fit indexes in structural models. Psychological Bulletin, 107, 238 –246.
Berry, W. D. (1984). Nonrecursive causal models. Beverly Hills, CA:
Sage.
Campbell, L., & Kashy, D. A. (2002). Estimating actor, partner, and
interaction effects for dyadic data using PROC MIXED and HLM: A
user-friendly guide. Personal Relationships, 9, 327–342.
Clark, M. S., Fitness, J., & Brissette, I. (2000). Understanding people’s
perceptions of relationships is crucial to understanding their emotional
lives. In G. Fletcher & M. S. Clark (Eds.), Blackwell handbook of social
psychology: Interpersonal processes (pp. 253–278). Oxford, England:
Blackwell Publishers.
Clark, M. S., & Mills, J. (1993). The difference between communal and
exchange relationships: What it is and is not. Personality and Social
Psychology Bulletin, 19, 684 – 691.
Clark, M. S., Ouellette, R., Powell, M. C., & Milberg, S. (1987). Recipient’s mood, relationship type, and helping. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 53, 94 –103.
Clark, M. S., & Taraban, C. (1991). Reactions to and willingness to express
emotion in communal and exchange relationships. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 27, 324 –336.
Collins, N. L. (1996). Working models of attachment: Implications for
explanation, emotion, and behavior. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 71, 810 – 832.
Collins, N. L., & Feeney, B. C. (2000). A safe haven: An attachment theory
perspective on support seeking and caregiving in intimate relationships.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 78, 1053–1073.
Collins, N. L., Ford, M. B., Guichard, A. C., & Allard, L. M. (2006).
Working models of attachment and attribution processes in intimate
relationships. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 32, 201–219.
Collins, N. L., & Read, S. J. (1990). Adult attachment, working models,
and relationship quality in dating couples. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 58, 644 – 663.
Coyne, J. C. (1976). Toward an interactional description of depression.
Psychiatry, 39, 28 – 40.
Coyne, J. C. (1999). Thinking interactionally about depression: A radical
restatement. In T. Joiner & J. C. Coyne (Eds.), The interactional nature
of depression (pp. 365–392). Washington, DC: American Psychological
Association.

439

Davila, J. (2001). Refining the association between excessive reassurance
seeking and depressive symptoms: The role of related interpersonal
constructs. Journal of Social & Clinical Psychology, 20, 538 –559.
DeHart, T., Pelham, B., & Murray, S. (2004). Implicit dependency regulation: Self esteem, relationship closeness, and implicit evaluations of
close others. Social Cognition, 22, 126 –146.
DePaulo, B. M., & Bell, K. L. (1996). Truth and investment: Lies are told
to those who care. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 71,
703–716.
Downey, G., & Feldman, S. I. (1996). Implications of rejection sensitivity
for intimate relationships. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
70, 1327–1343.
Downey, G., Freitas, A. L., Michaelis, B., & Khouri, H. (1998). The
self-fulfilling prophecy in close relationships: Rejection sensitivity and
rejection by romantic partners. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 75, 545–560.
Fein, S., Hilton, J. L., & Miller, D. T. (1990). Suspicion of ulterior
motivation and the correspondence bias. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 58, 753–764.
Fraley, R. C., Waller, N. G., & Brennan, K. A. (2000). An item response
theory analysis of self-report measures of adult attachment. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 78, 350 –365.
Gilbert, D. T., Krull, D. S., & Pelham, B. W. (1988). Of thoughts unspoken: Social inference and the self-regulation of behavior. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 55, 685– 694.
Gilbert, D. T., Pelham, B. W., & Krull, D. S. (1988). On cognitive
busyness: When person perceivers meet persons perceived. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 54, 733–740.
Gilovich, T., Medvec, V. H., & Savitsky, K. (2000). The spotlight effect in
social judgment: An egocentric bias in estimates of the salience of one’s
own actions and appearance. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 78, 211–222.
Gilovich, T., & Savitsky, K. (1999). The spotlight effect and the illusion of
transparency: Egocentric assessments of how we are seen by others.
Current Directions in Psychological Science, 8, 165–168.
Gilovich, T., Savitsky, K., & Medvec, V. H. (1998). The illusion of
transparency: Biased assessments of others’ ability to read one’s emotional states. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 75, 332–
346.
Hatcher, L. (1994). A step-by-step approach to using the SAS system for
factor analysis and structural equation modeling. Cary, NC: SAS Institute.
Heider, F. (1958). The psychology of interpersonal relations. New York:
Wiley.
Holmes, J. G., & Rempel, J. K. (1989). Trust in close relationships. In C.
Hendrick (Ed.), Close relationships (pp. 187–220). Thousand Oaks, CA:
Sage.
Hu, L.-T., & Bentler, P. M. (1998). Fit indices in covariance structure
modeling: Sensitivity to underparameterized model misspecification.
Psychological Methods, 3, 424 – 453.
Joiner, T. E., Jr., Katz, J., & Lew, A. (1999). Harbingers of depressotypic
reassurance seeking: Negative life events, increased anxiety, and decreased self-esteem. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 25,
630 – 637.
Joiner, T. E., Jr., & Metalsky, G. I. (2001). Excessive reassurance seeking:
Delineating a risk factor involved in the development of depressive
symptoms. Psychological Science, 12, 371–378.
Joiner, T. E., Jr., Metalsky, G. I., Katz, J., & Beach, S. R. H. (1999).
Depression and excessive reassurance-seeking. Psychological Inquiry,
10, 269 –278.
Jones, E. E., & Baumeister, R. F. (1976). The self-monitor looks at the
ingratiator. Journal of Personality, 44, 654 – 674.
Jones, E. E., & Davis, K. E. (1965). From acts to dispositions: The
attribution process in person perception. In L. Berkowitz (Ed.), Ad-

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

440

LEMAY AND CLARK

vances in experimental social psychology (Vol. 2, pp. 219 –266). New
York: Academic Press.
Jones, E. E., Davis, K. E., & Gergen, K. J. (1961). Role playing variations
and their informational value for person perception. Journal of Abnormal & Social Psychology, 63, 302–310.
Jones, E. E., & Harris, V. A. (1967). The attribution of attitudes. Journal
of Experimental Social Psychology, 3, 1–24.
Jones, E. E., Jones, R. G., & Gergen, K. J. (1963). Some conditions
affecting the evaluation of a conformist. Journal of Personality, 31,
270 –288.
Kelley, H. H. (1967). Attribution theory in social psychology. Nebraska
Symposium on Motivation, 15, 192–238.
Kelley, H. H., & Thibaut, J. W. (1978). Interpersonal relations: A theory
of interdependence. New York: Wiley.
Kenny, D. A., & DePaulo, B. M. (1993). Do people know how others view
them? An empirical and theoretical account. Psychological Bulletin,
114, 145–161.
Kenny, D. A., Kashy, D. A., & Cook, W. L. (2006). Dyadic data analysis.
New York: Guilford Press.
Kernis, M. H. (2003). Toward a conceptualization of optimal self-esteem.
Psychological Inquiry, 14, 1–26.
Kline, R. B. (2005). Principles and practice of structural equation modeling. New York: Guilford Press.
Lakey, B., McCabe, K. M., Fisicaro, S. A., & Drew, J. B. (1996). Environmental and personal determinants of support perceptions: Three
generalizability studies. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
70, 1270 –1280.
Laurenceau, J.-P., Barrett, L. F., & Pietromonaco, P. R. (1998). Intimacy as
an interpersonal process: The importance of self-disclosure, partner
disclosure, and perceived partner responsiveness in interpersonal exchanges. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 74, 1238 –1251.
Leary, M. R., & Baumeister, R. F. (2000). The nature and function of
self-esteem: Sociometer theory. In M. P. Zanna (Ed.), Advances in
experimental social psychology (Vol. 32, pp. 1– 62). San Diego, CA:
Academic Press.
Leary, M. R., Tambor, E. S., Terdal, S. K., & Downs, D. L. (1995).
Self-esteem as an interpersonal monitor: The sociometer hypothesis.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 68, 518 –530.
Lemay, E. P., Jr., & Ashmore, R. D. (2006). The relationship of social
approval contingency to trait self-esteem: Cause, consequence, or moderator? Journal of Research in Personality, 40, 121–139.
Lemay, E. P., Jr., & Clark, M. S. (in press). How the head liberates the
heart: Projection of communal responsiveness guides relationship promotion. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology.
Lemay, E. P., Jr., Clark, M. S., & Feeney, B. C. (2007). Projection of
responsiveness to needs and the construction of satisfying communal
relationships. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 92, 834 –
853.
MacDonald, G., Saltzman, J. L., & Leary, M. R. (2003). Social approval
and trait self-esteem. Journal of Research in Personality, 37, 23– 40.
Major, B., Carrington, P. I., & Carnevale, P. J. (1984). Physical attractiveness and self-esteem: Attributions for praise from an other-sex evaluator.
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 10, 43–50.
Marigold, D. C., Holmes, J. G., & Ross, M. (2007). More than words:
Reframing compliments from romantic partners fosters security in low
self-esteem individuals. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
92, 232–248.
McClure, J. (1998). Discounting causes of behavior: Are two reasons better
than one? Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 74, 7–20.
Mikulincer, M. (1998). Adult attachment style and individual differences in
functional versus dysfunctional experiences of anger. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 74, 513–524.
Miller, D. T., Visser, P. S., & Staub, B. D. (2005). How surveillance begets

perceptions of dishonesty: The case of the counterfactual sinner. Journal
of Personality and Social Psychology, 89, 117–128.
Murray, S. L., Bellavia, G. M., Rose, P., & Griffin, D. W. (2003). Once
hurt, twice hurtful: How perceived regard regulates daily marital interactions. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 84, 126 –147.
Murray, S. L., Holmes, J. G., & Collins, N. L. (2006). Optimizing assurance: The risk regulation system in relationships. Psychological Bulletin,
132, 641– 666.
Murray, S. L., Holmes, J. G., & Griffin, D. W. (1996). The benefits of
positive illusions: Idealization and the construction of satisfaction in
close relationships. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 70,
79 –98.
Murray, S. L., Holmes, J. G., & Griffin, D. W. (2000). Self-esteem and the
quest for felt security: How perceived regard regulates attachment processes. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 78, 478 – 498.
Murray, S. L., Holmes, J. G., Griffin, D. W., Bellavia, G., & Rose, P.
(2001). The mismeasure of love: How self-doubt contaminates relationship beliefs. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 27, 423– 436.
Murray, S. L., Holmes, J. G., MacDonald, G., & Ellsworth, P. C. (1998).
Through the looking glass darkly? When self-doubts turn into relationship insecurities. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 75,
1459 –1480.
Murray, S. L., Rose, P., Bellavia, G. M., Holmes, J. G., & Kusche, A. G.
(2002). When rejection stings: How self-esteem constrains relationshipenhancement processes. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
83, 556 –573.
Olsen, J. A., & Kenny, D. A. (2006). Structural equation modeling with
interchangeable dyads. Psychological Methods, 11, 127–141.
Pataki, S. P., & Clark, M. S. (2004). Self-presentations of happiness:
Sincere, polite, or cautious? Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin,
30, 905–914.
Reis, H. T., Clark, M. S., & Holmes, J. G. (2004). Perceived partner
responsiveness as an organizing construct in the study of intimacy and
closeness. In D. J. Mashek & A. P. Aron (Eds.), Handbook of closeness
and intimacy (pp. 201–225). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Reis, H. T., & Shaver, P. (1988). Intimacy as an interpersonal process. In
S. Duck, D. F. Hay, S. E. Hobfoll, & W. Ickes (Eds.), Handbook of
personal relationships: Theory, research and interventions (pp. 367–
389). Oxford, England: Wiley.
Rholes, W. S., Simpson, J. A., & Orina, M. M. (1999). Attachment and
anger in an anxiety-provoking situation. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 76, 940 –957.
Rosenberg, M. (1965). Society and the adolescent self-image. Princeton,
NJ: Princeton University Press.
Rusbult, C. E., & Van Lange, P. A. M. (1996). Interdependence processes.
In E. T. Higgins & A. W. Kruglanski (Eds.), Social psychology: Handbook of basic principles (pp. 564 –596). New York: Guilford Press.
Ruvolo, A. P., & Fabin, L. A. (1999). Two of a kind: Perceptions of own
and partner’s attachment characteristics. Personal Relationships, 6, 57–
79.
SAS Institute. (2002). SAS/STAT software (Version 9.1) [Computer software]. Cary, NC: Author.
Savitsky, K., Epley, N., & Gilovich, T. (2001). Do others judge us as
harshly as we think? Overestimating the impact of our failures, shortcomings, and mishaps. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
81, 44 –56.
Savitsky, K., & Gilovich, T. (2003). The illusion of transparency and the
alleviation of speech anxiety. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 39, 618 – 625.
Schwarz, N., Bless, H., Strack, F., Klumpp, G., Rittenauer-Schatka, H., &
Simons, A. (1991). Ease of retrieval as information: Another look at the
availability heuristic. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 61,
195–202.
Sedikides, C., Campbell, W. K., Reeder, G. D., & Elliot, A. J. (1999). The

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

HOW EXPRESSING INSECURITIES PERPETUATES THEM
Relationship Closeness Induction Task. Representative Research in Social Psychology, 23, 1– 4.
Shaver, P. R., Schachner, D. A., & Mikulincer, M. (2005). Attachment
style, excessive reassurance seeking, relationship processes, and depression. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 31, 343–359.
Simpson, J. A., Rholes, W. S., & Phillips, D. (1996). Conflict in close
relationships: An attachment perspective. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 71, 899 –914.
Singer, J. D. (1998). Using SAS PROC MIXED to fit multilevel models,
hierarchical models, and individual growth models. Journal of Educational and Behavioral Statistics, 24, 322–354.
Snyder, M., & Stukas, A. A., Jr. (1999). Interpersonal processes: The
interplay of cognitive, motivational, and behavioral activities in social
interaction. Annual Review of Psychology, 50, 273–303.
Sommer, K. L., & Baumeister, R. F. (2002). Self-evaluation, persistence,
and performance following implicit rejection: The role of trait selfesteem. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 28, 926 –938.
Srivastava, S., & Beer, J. S. (2005). How self-evaluations relate to being
liked by others: Integrating sociometer and attachment perspectives.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 89, 966 –977.
Stroebe, W., Eagly, A., & Stroebe, M. S. (1974). Self-esteem and the
perceived course of friendly and unfriendly acts. Personality and Social
Psychology Bulletin, 1, 387–389.

441

Tooby, J., & Cosmides, L. (1996). Friendship and the banker’s paradox:
Other pathways to the evolution of adaptations for altruism. In W. G.
Runciman, J. M. Smith, & R. I. M. Dunbar (Eds.), Evolution of social
behaviour patterns in primates and man (pp. 119 –143). Oxford, England: Oxford University Press.
Van Boven, L., Kamada, A., & Gilovich, T. (1999). The perceiver as
perceived: Everyday intuitions about the correspondence bias. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 77, 1188 –1199.
Vonk, R. (1998). The slime effect: Suspicion and dislike of likeable
behavior toward superiors. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 74, 849 – 864.
Vonk, R. (2002). Self-serving interpretations of flattery: Why ingratiation
works. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 82, 515–526.
Vorauer, J. D., & Cameron, J. J. (2002). So close, and yet so far: Does
collectivism foster transparency overestimation? Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 83, 1344 –1352.
Wenzlaff, R. M., & Wegner, D. M. (2000). Thought suppression. Annual
Review of Psychology, 51, 59 –91.

Received November 15, 2006
Revision received October 23, 2007
Accepted October 27, 2007 䡲

Members of Underrepresented Groups:
Reviewers for Journal Manuscripts Wanted
If you are interested in reviewing manuscripts for APA journals, the APA Publications and
Communications Board would like to invite your participation. Manuscript reviewers are vital to the
publications process. As a reviewer, you would gain valuable experience in publishing. The P&C
Board is particularly interested in encouraging members of underrepresented groups to participate
more in this process.
If you are interested in reviewing manuscripts, please write to the address below. Please note the
following important points:
• To be selected as a reviewer, you must have published articles in peer-reviewed journals. The
experience of publishing provides a reviewer with the basis for preparing a thorough, objective
review.
• To be selected, it is critical to be a regular reader of the five to six empirical journals that are most
central to the area or journal for which you would like to review. Current knowledge of recently
published research provides a reviewer with the knowledge base to evaluate a new submission
within the context of existing research.
• To select the appropriate reviewers for each manuscript, the editor needs detailed information.
Please include with your letter your vita. In the letter, please identify which APA journal(s) you
are interested in, and describe your area of expertise. Be as specific as possible. For example,
“social psychology” is not sufficient—you would need to specify “social cognition” or “attitude
change” as well.
• Reviewing a manuscript takes time (1– 4 hours per manuscript reviewed). If you are selected to
review a manuscript, be prepared to invest the necessary time to evaluate the manuscript
thoroughly.
Write to Journals Office, American Psychological Association, 750 First Street, NE, Washington,
DC 20002-4242.

