Journal of Personality and Social Psychology
2008, Vol. 94, No. 4, 647– 671

Copyright 2008 by the American Psychological Association
0022-3514/08/$12.00 DOI: 10.1037/0022-3514.94.4.647

How the Head Liberates the Heart: Projection of Communal
Responsiveness Guides Relationship Promotion
Edward P. Lemay, Jr., and Margaret S. Clark

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Yale University
In 5 studies, the authors tested predictions that (a) people project their own felt communal responsiveness
onto partners, perceiving partners to be just as caring and supportive as they are, and (b) projected
perceptions guide perceivers’ orientation toward further promotion of communal relationships. In Study
1, a manipulation of felt communal responsiveness toward a partner affected perceptions of the partner’s
responsiveness to the self, which in turn predicted evaluation of the partner. In Study 2, a manipulation
of responsiveness toward a new acquaintance biased perceptions of the acquaintance’s responsiveness to
the self, which in turn predicted attraction and warmth toward the new acquaintance. In Studies 3 and 5,
participants’ own felt communal responsiveness toward a friend appeared to bias their perceptions of the
friend’s communal responsiveness, which in turn predicted self-disclosure, evaluation of the friend
(Studies 3 and 5), and support provision (Study 5). Initial projected perceptions of a friend’s (Study 3)
and of a spouse’s (Study 4) communal responsiveness also predicted longitudinal changes in perceivers’
communal responsiveness. Results suggest that those who care for partners often project that care and
that this projection guides their relationship promotion.
Keywords: projection of responsiveness, assumed similarity, social support, communal relationships,
self-disclosure

people tend to assume that their own felt care for a partner is
reciprocated by that partner. In turn, we posit that projected perceptions of a partner’s responsiveness are functional for those who
care for partners, helping them feel the confidence and motivation
necessary to promote a communal bond with the partner. A model
guiding the present research is presented in Figure 1. Perceptions
of a partner’s responsiveness are thought to be driven, in large part,
by one’s own responsiveness to a partner (Path A) and, to a lesser
degree, by the partner’s actual felt responsiveness (Path B). In turn,
subjective perceptions of a partner’s responsiveness should predict
a class of outcomes reflecting an orientation toward promoting a
communal bond (Path C), and projection of responsiveness should
explain partially why people who claim to care for partners are
oriented toward promoting that bond (Path D). In the remainder of
this introduction, we further describe this model and the research
and theorizing that inspired it.

Perceiving that a partner responds supportively to one’s needs is
thought to be a critical determinant of the development of intimate
relationships (Reis, Clark, & Holmes, 2004). This perception enhances happiness and satisfaction within the relationship and contributes to the fulfillment of our need to belong in communal
relationships—those relationships characterized by a mutual bond
of caring for needs (Baumeister & Leary, 1995; Clark & Mills,
1993). Moreover, perceiving a partner as responsive to one’s needs
appears to motivate people to approach and invest in relationships
and to prevent pernicious defensive responses to doubts about a
partner’s acceptance and care (Murray, Holmes, & Collins, 2006).
In the current research, we test a model positing that perceptions
of a partner’s responsiveness to one’s needs are, in part, projections of one’s own responsiveness to a partner’s needs. That is,

Edward P. Lemay, Jr., and Margaret S. Clark, Department of Psychology, Yale University
Margaret S. Clark’s participation in the project and data collection for
Study 4 were supported by National Science Foundation Grant BNS
9983417. Edward P. Lemay, Jr.’s participation in the project and data
collection for the other studies were supported by a National Institute of
Mental Health National Research Service Award predoctoral fellowship.
The opinions and conclusions expressed in the article are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the opinions of the National Science
Foundation or of the National Institutes of Health. We thank Virginia
Fraser, Patricia Jenkins, and Sherri Pataki for assistance with collecting
data for Study 4; Colin Adamo, Elizabeth Cronson, and Lisa Shull for
coding data for Study 2; and Dave Kenny for advice regarding statistical
analysis of data from Study 5.
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Edward
P. Lemay, Jr. or Margaret S. Clark, Department of Psychology, Yale
University, Box 208205, New Haven, CT 06520-8205. E-mail: edward.lemay
@yale.edu or margaret.clark@yale.edu

Projection of Communal Responsiveness
As a relatively stable construct, perceived partner responsiveness is thought to involve generalized beliefs about the partner’s
concern for one’s welfare and supportive responses to one’s needs
in past interactions, as well as expectations for the partner’s
concern and communal motivation toward the self in the future.
Perceived partner responsiveness also appears to have a state-like
component, such that perceiving a partner as behaviorally responsive to or motivated to care for one’s needs varies from one
interaction to the next (Laurenceau, Barrett, & Pietromonaco,
1998).
How are these perceptions formed? The obvious answer is that
perceived partner responsiveness reflects the partner’s actual responsiveness. Indeed, perceived social support, a construct that
overlaps considerably with perceived partner responsiveness to
647

LEMAY AND CLARK

648

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Figure 1.

Model of projection of responsiveness guiding relationship promotion.

needs, does appear to contain a kernel of truth. When a person
claims to be generally supportive to a partner, the partner also
tends to claim that the person is generally supportive (Abbey,
Andrews, & Halman, 1995; Bolger, Zuckerman, & Kessler, 2000;
Vinokur, Schul, & Caplan, 1987). Likewise, perceptions of a
partner’s supportiveness in specific interactions are predicted by
observers’ ratings of that partner’s supportiveness (Collins &
Feeney, 2000; Cutrona, Hessling, & Suhr, 1997). Research in
related areas, including perceived regard and perceived willingness
to sacrifice for relationships, suggests a similar kernel of truth in
perceptions of partner responsiveness (Murray, Holmes, & Griffin,
2000; Van Lange et al., 1997). In addition, our own prior research
has produced evidence for a kernel of truth with measures of
responsiveness to needs; those who claimed to be motivated to
respond to their partners’ needs had partners who agreed that they
were motivated (Lemay, Clark, & Feeney, 2007). However, these
effects tend to be moderate to weak, suggesting an additional,
perhaps large, subjectively constructed component (cf. Reis et al.,
2004).
Prior research examining this subjective component has emphasized individual differences. Those who are depressed, who have
low self-esteem, or who are insecurely attached, for instance, tend
to think that partners do not accept or care for them (Collins &
Feeney, 2004; Lakey & Cassady, 1990; Murray et al., 2006;
Vinokur et al., 1987). Although individual differences undoubtedly
affect perceptions of others’ responsiveness, an individualdifference perspective cannot easily explain findings that perceived support largely appears to be a relationship phenomenon,
with most variability in perceptions occurring between relationships (Barry, Lakey, & Orehek, 2007; Cook, 2000; Lakey, McCabe, Fisicaro, & Drew, 1996).
We (Lemay et al., 2007) have posited another bias in perceiving
partners’ responsiveness, one that is compatible with the idea that
security in a partner’s responsiveness varies from one relationship
to the next. Specifically, people may project their own responsiveness toward a particular partner onto their perceptions of that
partner’s responsiveness to the self. In other words, when one
cares for a partner and desires a communal relationship with a
partner, he or she perceives that the partner harbors similar sentiments. This perspective builds on research suggesting that people
are rather egocentric perceivers, overusing self-related information
when making social judgments. The tendency to presume that
others are similar to the self, or to project the self onto others (cf.
D. S. Holmes, 1968), is a robust egocentric social-judgment process (Krueger & Clement, 1994), even when judging close partners
(Kenny & Acitelli, 2001; Murray, Holmes, & Griffin, 1996a).

People think that partners are more similar to the self than is
warranted by partners’ reports.
When inferring others’ sentiments, people may first start with
their own perspective and then make (often insufficient) adjustments until a plausible conclusion is reached (Epley, Keysar, Van
Boven, & Gilovich, 2004). As those who claim to be responsive to
partners expect and desire for their partners to be responsive in
return (Clark & Mills, 1993; J. G. Holmes & Rempel, 1989), the
conclusion that the partner is similarly responsive may be compelling. Indeed, prior research does suggest projection of communal responsiveness. Kenny and Acitelli (2001) found evidence of
projection bias using a single-item measure of the frequency of
partner caring in the past month. Our prior research also provides
evidence; people presumed that their spouse’s support provision
and their spouse’s motivation to respond to their needs were more
similar to their own support provision and communal motivation
than was indicated by the spouse’s reports (Lemay et al., 2007,
Studies 1 and 2). Moreover, an experimental manipulation designed to alter perceptions of one’s own responsiveness to a
partner affected perceptions of the partner’s responsiveness
(Lemay et al., 2007, Study 3).
This is not to say that the projection of responsiveness (Path A
in Figure 1) is always much greater than accurate discernment of
the partner’s responsiveness (Path B in Figure 1). Indeed, accuracy
may prevail when the evidence is clear. For instance, even caring
perceivers may perceive partners as uncaring when those partners
consistently behave in ways that unequivocally communicate lack
of care (i.e., they usually behave in ways that are readily interpreted as caustic, demeaning, or neglectful). Likewise, even uncaring perceivers may perceive partners as caring when those
partners consistently and unequivocally express their care. However, projection may frequently occur because the evidence is
rarely so clear. Partners usually exhibit a variety of behaviors that
are inconsistent or ambiguous with respect to their messages about
communal responsiveness, creating sufficient latitude for egocentric perception.
The current research examines what projections of communal
responsiveness might do for perceivers. Although they differ in the
specifics, a number of theorists have posited that social perception
can facilitate perceivers’ pursuit of goals (e.g., Bruner, 1957;
Ferguson & Bargh, 2004; Fiske, 1992; Gangestad, Simpson, DiGeronimo, & Biek, 1992; James, 1890; Kunda, 1990; RoskosEwoldsen & Fazio, 1992), and this perspective has been applied to
interpersonal perception within close relationships (Gill & Swann,
2004; Murray, 1999). We expect that projecting their own responsiveness onto partners assists caring perceivers in thinking and

PROJECTION OF COMMUNAL RESPONSIVENESS

behaving in ways that promote mutual communal relationships. It
may also assist uncaring perceivers in justifying their own lack of
responsiveness and even in moving away from commitments to
such relationships. Next we explain why.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Should One Seek a Communal Relationship? An
Interdependence Dilemma
With a few exceptions (e.g., parent– child relationships), people
expect and hope that their close relationships are characterized by
mutual responsiveness of roughly equal magnitude (Clark & Mills,
1993; J. G. Holmes & Rempel, 1989; Reis et al., 2004). Those who
are concerned for a partner’s welfare and are motivated to respond
supportively to a partner’s needs desire a mutual communal relationship in which the partner is similarly concerned and motivated.
Indeed, a likely determinant of whether people maintain, express,
and implement their desires for a mutually responsive relationship
is the perception that the partner harbors similar desires (cf. J. G.
Holmes & Rempel, 1989). People tend to avoid investing in
relationships that might prove hurtful, and the discovery that a
partner does not reciprocate one’s interest is a potent source of hurt
(Baumeister, Wotman, & Stillwell, 1993; Leary, Springer, Negel,
Ansell, & Evans, 1998; Murray et al., 2006). In addition, people
must judiciously seek receptive partners, lest the time and resources spent to establish mutual communal relationships be
wasted (Tooby & Cosmides, 1996). Perhaps the most adaptive
response to learning that a partner does not reciprocate interest in
a communal relationship is to disengage from the goal of establishing it and seek communal relationships elsewhere (cf. Wrosch,
Scheier, Miller, Schulz, & Carver, 2003). Murray et al.’s (2006)
research on dependency-regulation suggests that people do distance themselves from partners when they have doubts about those
partners’ caring and acceptance. Lack of trust in a partner’s responsiveness also predicts reduced willingness to sacrifice and
fewer prosocial responses to conflict (Wieselquist, Rusbult, Foster,
& Agnew, 1999). Concerns about protecting the self from seeking
and investing in an uncaring partner may instill a cautious mindset
in which people are reluctant to think or behave in ways that
promote communal relationships, as these thoughts and behaviors
usually also heighten the pain of rejection, further increase dependence, and exacerbate sunk costs. Thus, when seeking new communal relationships and when experiencing uncertainty about established relationships, people should be especially interested in
discerning the other’s care (Clark, Dubash, & Mills, 1998; Lydon,
Jamieson, & Holmes, 1997), as such care suggests the utility and
wisdom of relationship pursuit.
However, discerning a partner’s communal desires is fraught
with ambiguity. Information regarding a partner’s feelings and
motives must be gleaned indirectly from behavioral expressions,
which often tend to be more cryptic and indirect than transparent
and diagnostic (Baumeister et al., 1993; DePaulo, Kashy, Kirkendol, Wyer, & Epstein, 1996; Felson, 1980). Evidence also is often
inconsistent, with partners showing a mix of responsive and unresponsive behaviors and sometimes deviating from communal
norms in even the most normatively communal relationships
(Clark, Graham, & Grote, 2002). Furthermore, situational factors
often tax partners’ capacity to respond supportively (Finkel &
Campbell, 2001; Yovetich & Rusbult, 1994), and their support
attempts may have unintended negative effects (Bolger et al.,
2000; Coyne, Wortman, & Lehman, 1988). Even when they have

649

unequivocally expressed their communal sentiments in the past,
doubts about the longevity of those sentiments may remain. Hence,
it is not surprising that perceptions of partners’ responsiveness
show only modest relations to partners’ reports; there is a good
deal of “noise” in inferring their sentiments (Tazelaar, Van Lange,
& Ouwerkerk, 2004). This state of affairs creates an approachavoidance dilemma; to approach and promote a communal relationship, one must be confident that the partner desires the same
sort of relationship and will be responsive. At the same time, the
fact that evidence for partner responsiveness is typically shaky
suggests that one should self-protectively avoid the relationship
rather than approach it.

Resolving and Bypassing the Dilemma by Projecting
Communal Responsiveness
In the face of such uncertainty, how do people dispel their
doubts and proceed with relationship promotion or, alternatively,
self-protectively resist investing in the relationship. The projection
of one’s own communal responsiveness might reduce uncertainty.
Those who are themselves responsive and desire a mutually communal relationship can cast aside their doubts and harvest the
necessary confidence in a partner’s communal responsiveness by
projecting their own communal concerns and motives onto the
partner. This may allow perceivers to entertain cognitions and
enact behaviors that promote the growth of close, communal
relationships, despite the ambiguity of the partner’s expressions.
Those who do not care for a particular partner and do not desire a
relationship with the partner can resolve their doubts about the
possibility of foregoing a responsive partner by projecting their
lack of responsiveness. A subjective approach-avoidance dilemma
may be bypassed when people do not explicitly and effortfully
consider their partner’s responsiveness but rather project their own
responsiveness onto partners. Such automatic projection of goals
has been shown to occur (Kawada, Oettingen, Gollwitzer, &
Bargh, 2004).
This perspective is consistent with prior research on functional
projection of emotion and functional interpersonal cognition.
Maner et al. (2005) reported evidence suggesting that perceivers
project emotions onto others in a manner that facilitates perceivers’ goal pursuit. When a self-protection goal was activated, perceivers viewed outgroup targets as angry, a response that could
heighten vigilance and serve the self-protection goal. When a
mate-search goal was activated, male perceivers viewed attractive
female targets as sexually aroused, a response that could facilitate
approach and, in turn, service the mate-search goal. Similarly,
those who desire a communal relationship may project their own
communal motives onto partners, and this projection may functionally quell self-protective concerns and motivate cognitions and
behaviors that aid in the pursuit of a mutually responsive relationship.
Research on interpersonal cognition also suggests functional
biases. Simpson, Ickes, and Blackstone (1995) provided evidence
suggesting that the “head protects the heart”—people maintain
security in their romantic partner’s affections by misperceiving
their partner’s reactions to an attractive alternative partner. Relationships were more likely to persist when partners exhibited this
protective bias to a similar degree (see also Simpson, Orina, &
Ickes, 2003). Murray, Holmes, and Griffin (1996a, 1996b) provided evidence suggesting that people resolve relationship insecu-

LEMAY AND CLARK

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

650

rities that arise from doubts about investing in a less-than-ideal
partner by idealizing their partner’s traits. Moreover, those who
idealized partners enjoyed greater satisfaction, relationship stability, and decreased conflict (see also Murray, Holmes, Bellavia,
Griffin, & Dolderman, 2002). This research suggests functional
cognitive biases in perceiving close relationship partners. People
often believe they have the relationships they desire, and in many
cases, such wishful thinking promotes behaviors that ultimately
bring desires to fruition, at least from the perceiver’s subjective
stance. For caring perceivers, projection of responsiveness might
not only “protect the heart” by providing the perception that one is
cared for, indeed loved (Clark & Monin, 2006), but it may also
“liberate the heart” by assuaging self-protective concerns so that
people have the confidence to promote the communal bond, to
love.
As Figure 1 illustrates, we expect that perceptions of partner
responsiveness are largely projected (Path A) but also contain a
kernel of truth (Path B). Subjective perceptions of the partner’s
responsiveness should, in turn, predict relationship-promotion outcomes (Path C). Moreover, if those who report communal motivation are willing to promote a communal relationship, in part,
because they project that motivation, then the direct effect of own
responsiveness on relationship promotion (Path D) should be reduced once we control for projection of responsiveness. Such a
pattern would suggest that projection of responsiveness assists
caring perceivers in focusing on relationship promotion rather than
self-protection.

Indices of Relationship Promotion
We used several indices of relationship promotion in the current
research, including positive evaluation, attraction, self-disclosure,
and support provision. Positive evaluations of the partner ought to
promote communal relationships, as evaluation directs behavior
toward rewarding objects and away from harmful objects (Ferguson & Bargh, 2004; Roskos-Ewoldsen & Fazio, 1992). Indeed,
Murray et al.’s (2006) dependency-regulation research suggests
that negative partner evaluation reflects a desire to distance from
the relationship. In regard to new acquaintances, attraction—
wanting to learn more about and desiring to establish a closer
relationship with the acquaintance—may suggest a desire to promote a communal bond. Self-disclosure—the sharing of information about the self—is thought to facilitate the development of
close relationships (Altman & Taylor, 1973; S. Cohen, Sherrod, &
Clark, 1986). It plays a crucial role in establishing intimacy and a

Figure 2.

sense of understanding, validation, and care in the relationship
(Laurenceau et al., 1998; Reis & Shaver, 1988). Failure to disclose
suggests a desire to avoid intimacy (Mikulincer & Nachshon,
1991). Hence, self-disclosure is another index of an orientation
toward promoting a bond. Providing support to partners is yet
another index of one’s willingness to promote a mutual communal
relationship. Chronic desires for mutual communal relationships
and manipulations designed to increase desires for a communal
bond predict increased helping behavior, especially when the potential recipient appears to need help (Clark, Ouellette, Powell, &
Milberg, 1987). In contrast, those who desire to avoid intimacy and
dependence are especially unlikely to provide support when their
partners need it (Simpson, Rholes, & Nelligan, 1992).
Maintaining or increasing communal motivation over time also
may indicate a desire to promote a mutual communal relationship.
Those who are initially motivated to respond supportively to a
partner’s needs may maintain or increase that motivation over time
by projecting their own responsiveness onto partners and then
regulating their subsequent motivation in accordance with those
projected perceptions (see Figure 2). These processes working
together may, in part, explain the temporal stability of own responsiveness and perceptions of partner responsiveness. Consider
a person who cares for his/her friend. He or she may perceive the
friend as being just as caring through the projection process.
Armed with confidence in the friend’s caring, the person may
continue caring for the friend over time. That is, the temporal
stability of the individual’s own responsiveness may, in part, be
due to the combination of projecting responsiveness and then
regulating responsiveness in accordance with projected perceptions. Later, that maintained level of caring is projected. Thus, the
temporal stability of the individual’s perceptions of the friend’s
responsiveness may, in part, be due to the combination of regulating and then projecting own responsiveness.

Research Overview
In five studies, we tested the prediction that projected perceptions of a partner’s responsiveness guide relationship promotion.
In Study 1, we examined effects of a manipulation of perceived
responsiveness to an existing partner on perceptions of the partner’s responsiveness and evaluation of the partner. In Study 2, we
examined effects of a manipulation of communal motivation toward a new acquaintance on perceptions of that acquaintance’s
responsiveness, attraction to the acquaintance, and subsequent
behavioral warmth toward the acquaintance. In Study 3, we tested

Model of a longitudinal projection of responsiveness/relationship-promotion cycle.

PROJECTION OF COMMUNAL RESPONSIVENESS

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

effects of projected responsiveness on partner evaluation and willingness to self-disclose using a longitudinal, dyadic friendship
study. We also tested the longitudinal projection-promotion model
displayed in Figure 2. In Study 4, we tested the longitudinal
projection-promotion model in a dyadic marriage study. In Study
5, we tested effects of projected responsiveness on partner evaluation, self-disclosure, and support provision within a crosssectional study of three-person groups. This study also allowed us
to test our assumption that the projection of responsiveness is a
dyadic process. Moreover, in Study 5 we tested whether behavioral
forms of relationship promotion are perceived by partners.

Study 1
In the first study, we tested the hypotheses that experimentally
manipulated felt responsiveness to an existing relationship partner
would be projected, resulting in analogous changes in perceptions
of the partner’s responsiveness to the self (Path A in Figure 1) and
that projected perceptions of partner responsiveness would, in turn,
affect relationship promotion (evaluation of the partner; Path C in
Figure 1). We also tested whether changes in mood could explain
these effects.

Method
Participants and Procedure
Participants were recruited via advertisements on Internet bulletin boards for participation in an electronic survey in exchange
for entry in a $100 raffle. The 96 participants included 15 men and
81 women (M age ⫽ 34.89 years). After completing a series of
questions not relevant to the current research, participants completed the remainder of the survey in regard to a romantic partner
if they were currently in a romantic relationship (n ⫽ 72) and in
regard to a close friend if they were not currently in a romantic
relationship (n ⫽ 24). Participants randomly assigned to the neutral condition (n ⫽ 48) completed an open-ended question in
response to the following prompt: “Think of a time when you were
with this person and nothing unusual happened. That is, think of a
time you spent together that was typical of the time you usually
spend with this person. Vividly imagine the situation and then
describe what happened on the lines below.” Participants randomly
assigned to the unresponsive condition (n ⫽ 48) instead completed
an open-ended question in response to the following prompt:
“Think of a time when you treated this person badly. For example,
you may have done or said something that hurt this person’s
feelings, you may have neglected this person’s needs or desires, or
you may have been unpleasant. Vividly imagine the situation and
then briefly describe what happened on the lines below.” All
participants then completed the dependent measures described
below.

Perceived partner responsiveness. Participants’ perceptions of
the partner’s responsiveness was assessed with an analogous threeitem measure (e.g., “This person would go out of his/her way to
help me”) answered on identical response scales (␣ ⫽ .86).
Evaluation of partner. Participants’ evaluations of the partners
were assessed with a nine-item measure (“This person treats others
kindly”; “This person is well-liked by others”; “This person is
cruel to others”; “This person is a person of worth, at least on an
equal basis with others”; “This person has a number of good
qualities”; “I take a positive attitude toward this person”; “This
person treats others with respect”; “This person has more shortcomings and flaws than the average person”; “This person does not
have much to be proud of”) completed using identical response
scales. Responses to negatively worded items were reverse scored
(␣ ⫽ .92).
Mood. Participants indicated the extent to which they presently felt six emotions (afraid, angry, happy, sad, alert, and content) using 5-point response scales (1 ⫽ very slightly or not at all, 5 ⫽
extremely). After we reverse scored responses to the negative emotions, we averaged responses to create an index of mood (␣ ⫽ .67).

Results and Discussion
A correlation matrix of all primary independent and dependent
variables appears in Table 1. With the exception of the direct link
between perceived partner responsiveness and experimental condition, all variables were significantly or marginally correlated.
Given our predictions of multiple indirect paths linking the
experimental condition to partner evaluation, we used path analysis (with the SAS CALIS procedure) to test hypotheses. The
analyses used maximum-likelihood parameter estimation on the
variance– covariance matrix. The tested model was guided by our
predictions that the manipulation (coded 1 for the unresponsive
condition, 0 for the neutral condition) would affect own responsiveness, own responsiveness would affect perceived partner responsiveness, and perceived partner responsiveness would affect
partner evaluation. Participants who were made to feel unresponsive also may have derogated the partner as a means of justifying
their lack of responsiveness, without this derogation depending on
perceived partner responsiveness. Hence, we also modeled the
residual direct effect of own responsiveness on partner evaluation.
This model was a good fit to the data (goodness-of-fit index [GFI]
⫽ 1, comparative fit index [CFI] ⫽ 1, non-normed fit index ⫽
1.05, root-mean-square error of approximation [RMSEA] ⫽ 0),
␹2(2, N ⫽ 96) ⫽ 0.28, ns. Estimated standardized path coefficients
are displayed in Figure 3. Path coefficients suggest that the ma-

Table 1
Correlation Matrix of Primary Independent and Dependent
Variables (Study 1)
Variable

Measures
Own responsiveness. Participants’ own felt responsiveness to
the partner’s needs was assessed with a three-item measure (“I
would sacrifice a lot for this person,” “I care about this person,” “I
would go out of my way to help this person”) answered on 6-point
response scales (1 ⫽ strongly disagree, 6 ⫽ strongly agree; ␣ ⫽
.90).

651

1.
2.
3.
4.

Condition
Own responsiveness
Perceived partner responsiveness
Partner evaluation

1

2

—

⫺.21*
—

3

4

⫺.15
⫺.17†
.57***
.61***
—
.63***
—

Note. Condition is coded in the unresponsive direction (1 ⫽ unresponsive, 0 ⫽ neutral).
†
p ⬍ .10. * p ⬍ .05. *** p ⬍ .001.

LEMAY AND CLARK

652

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Figure 3.

Results of path analysis (Study 1). *p ⬍ .05.

nipulation affected own responsiveness, which predicted perceived
partner responsiveness (Path A in Figure 1), which in turn predicted evaluation (Path C in Figure 1). This analysis supports our
model, suggesting that the manipulation of own responsiveness
had indirect effects on relationship-promotion outcomes via effects
on own responsiveness and, in turn, perceptions of partner responsiveness.1

Alternative Models
We tested whether the effects of own responsiveness on perceived partner responsiveness could be explained by partner evaluation. For instance, perhaps those who were made to feel unresponsive directly derogated the partner to justify their lack of
responsiveness, and this derogation, in turn, predicted perceived
partner responsiveness. Hence, we tested another model in which
experimental condition predicted own responsiveness, own responsiveness predicted partner evaluation, and partner evaluation
predicted perceived partner responsiveness. This model was not a
good fit to the data, ␹2(3, N ⫽ 96) ⫽ 9.38, p ⬍ .05.
Alternatively, perhaps the experimental condition predicted negative mood, which then contaminated people’s relationship perceptions. However, the effect of experimental condition on mood
was not significant ( p ⫽ .26), although mood was significantly
correlated with own responsiveness (r ⫽ .21, p ⬍ .05), perceived
partner responsiveness (r ⫽ .37, p ⬍ .001), and evaluation of
partner (r ⫽ .30, p ⬍ .01). Regression analyses that controlled for
mood still revealed an effect of experimental condition on own
responsiveness (␤ ⫽ ⫺.28, p ⫽ .068; which was somewhat stronger when error variance because of relationship type was also
controlled, ␤ ⫽ ⫺.30, p ⫽ .05), an effect of own responsiveness
on perceived partner responsiveness (␤ ⫽ .58, p ⬍ .001), and an
effect of perceived partner responsiveness on evaluation of partner
(␤ ⫽ ⫺.35, p ⬍ .001). Hence, mood did not appear to explain the
pattern of results.

Study 2
In Study 2, we experimentally manipulated participants’ responsiveness to a new acquaintance during a brief interaction and then
measured perceptions of the acquaintance’s responsiveness to the
self. We expected that those who were induced to be responsive to
their new interaction partners, relative to those who were induced
not to be responsive, would perceive interaction partners as engaging in more responsive behaviors toward the self and as being
more attracted to the self via the projection process (Path A in
Figure 1). Of course, partners may react to this manipulated
responsiveness by actually engaging in more responsive behaviors
in return and by actually being more attracted. However, the
projection-of-responsiveness model predicts the existence of projection after accounting for indices of the other’s actual respon-

***

p ⬍ .001.

siveness (acquaintances’ self-reported behavior and attraction in
this study).
We also expected that projection of responsiveness would affect
participants’ willingness to promote the relationship (Path C in
Figure 1). We examined participants’ attraction (i.e., liking and
desire for a closer relationship), expecting that participants assigned to be responsive to acquaintances would report greater
attraction than would participants who were assigned not to be
responsive and that this effect would be explained by participants’
tendencies to see their own responsiveness or lack thereof in the
behavior of the new acquaintance. Moreover, we assessed partic1

We also tested hypotheses using traditional ordinary least squares
regression analyses. Results were largely consistent with the model displayed in Figure 3. In these analyses, we included relationship type
(romantic vs. not romantic) as a covariate in all analyses to reduce error
variance due to this source. Doing so improved the strength of indirect
effects, although relationship type was not confounded with condition. The
Sobel test (Baron & Kenny, 1986) of the indirect effect of the manipulation
on perceived partner responsiveness via own responsiveness was significant (z ⫽ 2.02, p ⬍ .05). The Sobel test of the indirect effect of the
manipulation on evaluation via own responsiveness also was significant
(z ⫽ 2.07, p ⬍ .05). Finally, the Sobel test of the indirect effects of own
responsiveness on evaluation via perceived partner responsiveness (controlling for experimental condition) was significant (z ⫽ 3.98, p ⬍ .001).
Detailed results of these analyses are available from the authors upon
request.
Some readers may be concerned about the lack of a significant correlation between perceived partner responsiveness and experimental condition
in Table 1. For instance, does this suggest that there is no indirect effect of
the experimental condition on perceived partner responsiveness via an
effect on own responsiveness? Although the traditional approach to mediation argues that a direct effect of the independent variable on the dependent variable is necessary (Baron & Kenny, 1986), more recent treatments
have claimed that tests of indirect effects that require such a direct effect
may be overly conservative and lack power, especially when there is an a
priori belief that the effect size may be small (and the Study 1 manipulation
is likely to produce a small effect, given the nature of the manipulation
relative to the resilience of beliefs about one’s own and a partner’s
responsiveness) and when the direct effect of the independent variable on
the dependent variable changes sign when controlling for the mediator (and
this was the case, although the reversed-sign direct effect was not significant; Fritz & MacKinnon, 2007; MacKinnon, Krull, & Lockwood, 2000;
Shrout & Bolger, 2002). Some have argued that explicit tests of the indirect
effect are more appropriate (MacKinnon, Lockwood, Hoffman, West, &
Sheets, 2002), and those tests, presented above, support our model. Also,
the insignificant correlation is, in part, due to error variance attributable to
relationship type, gender, and our small sample size; once we reduced error
variance by controlling for relationship type and gender, the direct effect of
experimental condition on perceived partner responsiveness was marginal
(␤ ⫽ ⫺.31, p ⫽ .07). Moreover, some may argue that our directional
hypothesis permits a one-tailed test. Using a one-tailed test, this regression
coefficient is, of course, significant (p ⬍ .05).

PROJECTION OF COMMUNAL RESPONSIVENESS

ipants’ interpersonal warmth toward partners after the interaction
and expected that projection-guided attraction would, in turn,
predict increased subsequent warmth. Such a pattern would suggest that responsive participants pursue a close relationship after
the interaction because they project their responsiveness.

Method

653

drew the letter B did not receive instructions. Participants were
then reunited.
Participants then had an interaction in which they took turns
sharing their answers to the questions. They were given 10 min for
the interaction but could notify the experimenter (who was waiting
in the other room) if they finished in fewer than 10 min. Participants then returned to the separate rooms to complete the dependent measures described below.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Participants
Eighty-six participants (33 men and 53 women; M age ⫽ 21
years) were recruited from flyers posted throughout a college
campus and on electronic bulletin boards. In exchange for participation, participants received $10 or research-participation credit
in a psychology course.

Procedure
Participants completed an electronic survey in which they provided demographic information and answered several personal
open-ended survey items (e.g., “describe a humorous experience,”
“describe a unique accomplishment”). Then they reported in pairs
to a laboratory session. After obtaining informed consent and
verifying that the participants were not acquainted, the experimenter described the study. He explained that participants would
have a 10-min interaction in which they would share their answers
to the open-ended questions they answered during the online
survey. He then gave each participant a printed page that included
their answers to each question, preceded by a few additional
questions (e.g., first name, hometown, year in college, career
aspirations). Participants then drew a piece of paper and announced whether they drew the letter A or the letter B. The
experimenter explained that he would describe the meaning of this
drawing later. Participants were then ushered into separate rooms
to look over (and change if they desired) their answers.
During this time, the experimenter privately explained to the
participant who drew the letter A (termed actor) that the study was
about how particular types of behaviors affected social interactions. To examine this, he explained, he gives instructions to the
person who drew the letter A regarding how to behave toward the
other participant (termed partner) during the interaction. The experimenter then gave this participant an instruction sheet that
reiterated the explanation of procedures (just described) and provided behavioral instructions. Participants randomly assigned to
the responsive condition then read the following instructions:
“During the interaction, please behave in a positive manner toward
the other participant. Act as if you are interested in and impressed
by the other person. That is, be friendly and encouraging.” Participants randomly assigned to the neutral behavior condition instead
read the following instructions: “During the interaction, please
behave in a neutral manner toward the other participant. Act as if
you are not particularly interested in or impressed by the other
person. That is, do not be friendly or encouraging. However, do
not be mean or rude either. Just be neutral.” The experimenter
verified that participants understood and believed they would be
able to follow the instructions and suggested that participants write
a reminder on their page of questions so they would remember to
behave in the requested manner during the interaction. He also
asked participants to refrain from disclosing the fact that they
received instructions to the other participant. The participant who

Measures
Own responsive behaviors. Using 9-point response scales
(1 ⫽ strongly disagree, 5 ⫽ neutral, 9 ⫽ strongly agree), participants completed six items assessing their own responsive behavior during the interaction (i.e., “I was warm toward the other
participant during the interaction,” “I was supportive of the other
participant during the interaction,” “I expressed positive feelings
toward the other participant during the interaction,” “I expressed
positive evaluations of the other participant during the interaction,”
“I was friendly toward the other participant during the interaction,”
“I made the other participant feel happy during the interaction”).
We averaged responses to these six items to create an index of own
responsive behavior (Cronbach’s ␣ ⫽ .96).
Perceptions of partner’s responsive behaviors. Using identical response scales, participants completed six analogous items
assessing their perceptions of their interaction partner’s responsive
behaviors (e.g., “The other participant was warm toward me during
the interaction”; ␣ ⫽ .95).
Perceptions of partner’s attraction to the self. Using identical
response scales, participants completed three items assessing their
perceptions of the interaction partner’s attraction to the self (e.g.,
“The other participant liked me during the interaction,” “The other
participant is interested in getting to know me better,” “The other
participant would like to start a friendship with me”; ␣ ⫽ .89).
Attraction to the partner. Using identical response scales, participants completed three analogous items assessing their own
attraction to their interaction partner (e.g., “I would like to start a
friendship with the other participant”; ␣ ⫽ .91).
Written-message warmth. Following the interaction and administration of all other dependent measures, participants wrote a
note to their partner regarding how they perceived the interaction,
ostensibly to be read by the other participant. The notes were rated
on responsiveness by four coders who were unaware of participants’ experimental condition and actor or partner status. Raters
used 7-point response scales (1 ⫽ not at all responsive, 7 ⫽
extremely responsive) and were instructed to use the following
definition of responsiveness: “friendly, warm, communicating
care, positive evaluation, or interest in the other.” Ratings of the
responsiveness of the actors’ written messages were internally
consistent (␣ ⫽ .86). Thus, they were averaged to form a single
index of the actors’ subsequent written-message warmth.

Results and Discussion
A correlation matrix of all primary model variables is provided
in Table 2. Path analysis (with the SAS CALIS procedure) tested
the fit of a model that posited that the manipulation (coded 1 for
responsive-behavior condition, 0 for neutral-behavior condition)
affects actors’ self-perceived responsiveness, which affects actors’
perceptions of partners’ responsiveness (Path A in Figure 1),

LEMAY AND CLARK

654

Table 2
Correlation Matrix of Primary Independent and Dependent Variables (Study 2)
Variable

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.

Condition
Actor’s own responsiveness
Partners’ own responsiveness
Partners’ own attraction
Actors’ perceived partner responsiveness
Actors’ perceived partner attraction
Actors’ own attraction
Actors’ written-message warmth

1
—

2

3

***

.90
—

4
†

.30
.24
—

***

.59
.50***
.54***
—

5
***

.56
.63***
.19
.34*
—

6
***

.58
.70***
.21
.38*
.56***
—

7
†

.27
.39**
.02
.17
.51***
.38*
—

8
.21
.24
.13
.01
.40**
.17
.58***
—

Note. Condition is coded in the responsive direction (1 ⫽ responsive; 0 ⫽ neutral).
†
p ⬍ .10. * p ⬍ .05. ** p ⬍ .01. ***p ⬍ .001.

which affects actors’ attraction to partners (Path C in Figure 1),
which affects actors’ written-message warmth following the interaction. The model also specified the manipulation as a cause of
partners’ responsiveness (allowing for the possibility that actors’
manipulated behavior elicited concordant behavior from partners).
However, preliminary analyses suggested that actors’ perceptions
of partners’ responsiveness might not reflect partners’ responsiveness (Path B in Figure 1) at all. Thus, the model did not specify
partners’ responsiveness as a cause of any of the other variables.
The analysis used dyad as the unit of analysis and maximumlikelihood method of estimation on the variance– covariance matrix. The tested model and estimated standardized path coefficients
are displayed in the upper portion of Figure 4. Path coefficients are
consistent with predictions. This model was an excellent fit to the
data (GFI ⫽ .96, CFI ⫽ 1, non-normed fit index ⫽ 1.07, RMSEA ⫽ 0), ␹2(10, N ⫽ 42) ⫽ 5.17, ns.
As depicted in the lower portion of Figure 4, we tested a model
that substituted partners’ responsive behavior with partners’ attraction and actors’ perception of partners’ responsive behavior with
actors’ perception of partners’ attraction. This model posits an
effect of the manipulation on actors’ perceptions of partners’
internal feelings (attraction) rather than on their perceptions of
partners’ behavior. This model also was an excellent fit to the data
(GFI ⫽ .95, CFI ⫽ 1, non-normed fit index ⫽ 1.04, RMSEA ⫽ 0),
␹2(10, N ⫽ 42) ⫽ 7.03, ns.2
We tested alternative models that also included accuracy paths (i.e.,
an effect of partners’ responsive behavior/attraction on actors’ analogous perceptions). These added paths did not significantly improve
model fit—perceptions of behavior model ⌬␹2(1) ⫽ 0.13, ns; perceptions of attraction model ⌬␹2(1) ⫽ 0.13, ns.
It is important to note that the actors’ responsiveness variable in
these models resembles a manipulation check, and its strong association with the experimental condition may have been inflated
by experimental demand characteristics (i.e., participants who
were instructed to be responsive subsequently claiming that they
were responsive because they felt that they should claim this).
However, we believe that it is important to use actors’ responsiveness as a mediator of the experimental condition in our models to
test our assumption that actors’ self-perceived responsiveness predicted downstream model variables. Models in which this variable
was omitted still provided support for our theoretical perspective.
Moreover, although the effect of experimental condition on actors’
self-perceived responsiveness may have been inflated by experimental demand characteristics, partners’ differential responsive-

ness and attraction in the two conditions suggest that actors actually behaved differently. Also, experimental demand cannot
explain why actors who were manipulated to be responsive perceived partners as responsive in return, independent of partners’
self-reported responsiveness.
Finally, it is important to note that actors were told that they
could write anything that they wanted in their messages and that
actors’ perceptions of partners’ responsiveness or attraction (and,
in turn, actors’ attraction to partners) completely mediated effects
of the experimental condition and actors’ own responsiveness on
their written-message warmth. Thus, it is not the case that actors
simply continued to follow the responsive or unresponsive interaction instructions when writing their messages (which took place
after the interaction and after completion of several other depen-

2
We also tested hypotheses using traditional OLS regression analyses.
In all analyses, the appropriate partners’ report (responsive behavior in
models involving perceived partners’ responsive behavior and attraction in
models involving perceived partners’ attraction) was controlled. Results of
these analyses were largely consistent with the results displayed in Figure 4. Indirect effects of experimental condition on perceived partner
responsive behavior and perceived partner attraction, mediated by own
responsiveness, were significant (Sobel’s zs ⫽ 2.18 and 3.44, ps ⬍ .05
and ⬍ .001, respectively). The indirect effect of experimental condition on
actors’ attraction, mediated by perceived partner responsive behavior, was
significant (Sobel’s z ⫽ 2.46, p ⬍ .05), whereas the indirect effect of
experimental condition on actors’ attraction, mediated by perceived partner
attraction, was marginal (Sobel’s z ⫽ 1.69, p ⬍ .10). Finally, indirect
effects of perceived partner responsive behavior and perceived partner
attraction on written message warmth, mediated by actors’ attraction (controlling for experimental condition), were significant (Sobel’s z ⫽ 2.28,
p ⬍ .05) and marginal (Sobel’s z ⫽ 1.69, p ⬍ .10), respectively. Detailed
results of these analyses are available from the authors upon request.
Again, although some of the zero-order correlations were not significant,
these analyses suggest indirect effects that are consistent with our predictions (see Footnote 1). Also, zero-order correlations between experimental
condition and actors’ written message warmth, between actors’ responsiveness and partners’ responsiveness, between actors’ responsiveness and
actors’ written message warmth, and between partners’ responsiveness and
actors’ perceived partner attraction were marginal when using one-tailed
tests (ps ⬍ .10).
The model paths shown in Figure 4 were not moderated by gender, although
two residual effects of upstream variables on downstream variables, controlling for mediating variables, were significantly moderated by gender. Details
of these analyses are available from the authors upon request.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

PROJECTION OF COMMUNAL RESPONSIVENESS

Figure 4.

Results of path analyses (Study 2). *p ⬍ .05.

dent measures). Instead, it seems that their tendencies to see their
own responsiveness reflected back to them in partners’ behavior
explained their continued warmth toward partners.
This study provides support for several of our hypotheses. First,
it provides additional experimental evidence for the projection of
responsiveness, extending results of Study 1 to a behavioral manipulation of responsiveness. Second, it provides evidence that the
projection of responsiveness affects willingness to promote a relationship with a new acquaintance, in terms of self-reported
attraction and subsequent warmth toward the partner. Those who
were manipulated to be responsive appeared to project their responsiveness, which appeared to enhance their attraction to the
partner and promote continued warmth toward the partner after the
interaction. There was little evidence of accuracy in this study—
partners’ self-reported attraction and responsiveness did not predict actors’ perceptions. Perhaps this was the case because, in our
efforts to experimentally control actors’ responsiveness through
providing behavioral instructions, actors were overly focused on
their own behavior during the interaction. Indeed, we did find
evidence of a small accuracy effect in subsequent studies.

Study 3
The third study is a longitudinal dyadic study on friendship. In this
study, we tested effects of projected responsiveness on evaluation of
the partner, as done in Study 1, as well as a second index of relationship promotion: self-disclosure. In particular, we examined willingness to express feelings of hurt and sadness caused by the relationship
partner. Such emotions likely involve a sense of vulnerability (a low
sense of control and a high sense of uncertainty; Smith & Ellsworth,
1985), and they thus communicate trust in the partner (cf. Clark &
Finkel, 2005). Moreover, the expression of hurt and sadness caused
by one’s partner may communicate to the partner that the expresser
values the relationship. We expected that caring perceivers would be
willing to express these emotions because they project their own care
onto partners (see Figure 1). That is, the projection process provides
them with the desire for increased closeness that motivates selfdisclosure and the confidence necessary to disclose vulnerabilities.

**

p ⬍ .01.

655

***

p ⬍ .001.

We also tested the hypothesized longitudinal projection/
relationship-promotion cycle (see Figure 2). That hypothesized
cycle predicts that a perceiver’s initial caring for a partner’s needs
influences the perceiver’s judgment of the partner’s caring through
the projection process. In turn, these projected perceptions should
affect the perceiver’s later caring for the partner. This subsequent
responsiveness then may be projected.

Method
Participants and Procedure
Sixty dyads were recruited for a study on friendship from electronic
bulletin boards and newspaper advertisements. Five dyads were dating couples who considered themselves to be friends. The remaining
55 dyads were platonic friends. The dyads included 32 female pairs,
10 male pairs, and 18 mixed-sex pairs. Ages ranged from 17 to 45
years (M ⫽ 21). Most participants (n ⫽ 116) were college students.
Upon recruitment, they completed a series of questionnaires (T1).
Approximately 5 months later (M ⫽ 139 days), 39 intact dyads
completed a follow-up questionnaire (T2).3 T1 analyses were based
on data from the whole sample. T2 and longitudinal analyses were
based on data from this reduced sample.

Measures
Own responsiveness. Participants completed a four-item measure assessing motivations to care for their friends (“I care for this
person,” “I would go out of my way to help this person,” “I would
give up a lot to help this person,” “I don’t care about this person”;
3

Actually, 92 of the original 120 participants completed the T2 questionnaire. Because the current analyses involve data from both partners,
only the 37 intact dyads that completed the T2 questionnaire were used. We
used t tests to compare the participants who did not complete the T2
questionnaire with those who did on all of the T1 measures in this study.
No effects were statistically significant. Thus, we are reasonably confident
that the T2 sample was not biased.

LEMAY AND CLARK

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

656

T1 ␣ ⫽ .86, T2 ␣ ⫽ .81). Items were answered on a 6-point
response scale (1 ⫽ strongly disagree, 6 ⫽ strongly agree), and
the negatively worded item was reverse-scored.
Perceptions of friend’s responsiveness. Using the same response scales, participants completed an analogous measure assessing perceptions of their friends’ motivation to care for their
needs (e.g., “This person cares about me”; T1 ␣ ⫽ .84, T2 ␣ ⫽
.84).
Willingness to express vulnerability. Using the same response
scales, participants completed two items assessing their willingness to express sadness and hurt feelings (i.e., “If this person made
me sad, I would express it to him/her”; “If this person hurt my
feelings, I would express it to him/her”; T1 ␣ ⫽ .90; T2 ␣ ⫽ .95).
Evaluation of friend. Participants completed two measures of
their evaluation of the friend. They indicated the extent to which
nine positive interpersonal traits (e.g., witty and humorous, considerate, kind and affectionate, warm) and seven negative interpersonal traits (e.g., critical and judgmental, thoughtless, distant,
demanding) described their friend generally on a 9-point response
scale (1 ⫽ not at all characteristic, 9 ⫽ completely characteristic;
T1 ␣ ⫽ .80, T2 ␣ ⫽ .85). These traits were taken from the
Interpersonal Qualities Scale (Murray et al., 1996a). The second
measure was a 2-item measure assessing global evaluation (“I
view this person positively,” “This person has a number of good
qualities”; T1 ␣ ⫽ .84, T2 ␣ ⫽ .75). Scores on the two measures
were significantly correlated (T1 r ⫽ .43, T2 r ⫽ .56, ps ⬍ .001),
and we standardized and averaged them to create an index of
evaluation at each assessment wave.

Results and Discussion
Analysis Strategy
We examined effects of perceivers’ responsiveness and friends’
responsiveness on perceivers’ perceptions of friends’ responsiveness. The effect of friends’ responsiveness on perceivers’ perceptions indicates accuracy or understanding (Path B in Figure 1); the
effect of perceivers’ own responsiveness to friends on perceivers’
perceptions indicates projection (Path A in Figure 1; cf. Kenny &
Acitelli, 2001; Murray et al., 1996a). We used mediation analyses
to examine the degree to which projected responsiveness predicted
relationship promotion (evaluation of the partner, willingness to
express vulnerability; Path C in Figure 1). An effect of projected

responsiveness on relationship promotion is indicated by a significant indirect effect of perceivers’ own responsiveness on their
relationship promotion, mediated by their perceptions of friends’
responsiveness while controlling for friends’ self-reported responsiveness. Such a pattern would suggest that, independent of partners’ self-reported caring, caring perceivers are more willing to
promote the relationship than are uncaring perceivers because they
see partners as more responsive to them. The indirect paths were
formally tested with Sobel tests (Baron & Kenny, 1986). Given
that the two partners’ reports are dependent within dyads, hypotheses were tested with the SAS MIXED procedure. Intercepts were
modeled as randomly varying across dyads, which modeled the
nested data structure. Because of the restricted degrees of freedom
within dyads, slopes were modeled as fixed (cf. Campbell &
Kashy, 2002; Kenny, Kashy, & Cook, 2006).

Correlations
A correlation matrix of all study variables appears in Table 3.

Projection of Responsiveness
A series of analyses tested the simultaneous effects of perceivers’
own responsiveness (projection) and friends’ responsiveness (accuracy or understanding) on concurrent perceptions of friends’ responsiveness. At both assessment waves, perceivers’ own responsiveness
predicted their perceptions of friends’ responsiveness (T1 b ⫽ .79,
p ⬍ .001; T2 b ⫽ .99, p ⬍ .001), suggesting projection of responsiveness. At T1, friends’ responsiveness also predicted perceivers’
perceptions (b ⫽ .13, p ⬍ .05), suggesting a small kernel of truth in
perceivers’ perceptions. At T2, this effect was not significant, t(75) ⫽
.87. These coefficients are unstandardized, averaged within-dyad
slopes. For example, every one-unit increase in perceivers’ own
responsiveness at T1 was accompanied by a 0.79-unit increase in
perception of friends’ responsiveness. These analyses replicate projection findings of Studies 1 and 2 with a nonexperimental design.

Regulating Relationship Promotion
An additional set of analyses tested predictions regarding effects
of projected responsiveness on indices of relationship promotion
(evaluation of friend and willingness to disclose vulnerability).
These analyses involved pairs of models. In the first model, the

Table 3
Correlation Matrix of Variables (Study 3)
Variable
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.

T1
T1
T1
T1
T2
T2
T2
T2

own responsiveness
perceived friend responsiveness
willingness to express vulnerability
evaluation of friend
own responsiveness
perceived friend responsiveness
willingness to express vulnerability
evaluation of friend

1
***

.5
.5***
.23*
.33**
.31*
.32*
.19
.06

2
***

.8
.49***
.29**
.35**
.37**
.29*
.26*
.09

3
***

.35
.42***
.24†
.08
.22†
.25*
.24†
.02

4
***

.68
.66***
.23*
.24†
.22†
.36**
.07
.26*

5
***

.74
.67***
.36**
.5***
.26
.26†
.21
.1

6
***

.55
.67***
.31**
.35**
.77***
.19
.26**
.06

7

8

*

.29*
.3*
.07
.54***
.53***
.56***
.28*
.25

.27
.4**
.72***
.22†
.45***
.5***
.39*
.13

Note. Values on the diagonal (which is indicated by boldface values) are pairwise intraclass correlations, which are the correlations of the two partners’
reports. Values above the diagonal are bivariate intrapersonal intraclass correlations, reflecting the association of two variables measured on the same
partner. Values below the diagonal are bivariate interpersonal intraclass correlations, reflecting the association of two variables measured on different
partners. All correlations were computed with the double-entry method (cf. Griffin & Gonzalez, 1995; Kenny, Kashy, & Cook, 2006).
†
p ⬍ .10. * p ⬍ .05. ** p ⬍ .01. *** p ⬍ .001.

PROJECTION OF COMMUNAL RESPONSIVENESS

657

Table 4
Effects of Own Responsiveness and Friends’ Responsiveness on Indices of Relationship
Promotion as a Function of Controlling for Perceived Friend Responsiveness (Study 3)
T1
Predictor

Model 1

Own responsiveness
Friends’ responsiveness
PFR

.92***
⫺.02
—

T2
Model 2

Model 1

Model 2

.92***
⫺.08
—

.42†
⫺.12
.50**

Predicting evaluation of friend
.59***
⫺.07
.41**

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Predicting willingness to express vulnerability
Own responsiveness
Friends’ responsiveness
PFR

.54**
.12
—

.09
.05
.56*

.84***
.19
—

.40
.15
.45*

Note. PFR ⫽ perceived friend responsiveness.
†
p ⬍ .10. * p ⬍ .05. **p ⬍ .01. *** p ⬍ .001.

relationship-promotion outcome variable was regressed on perceivers’ responsiveness and friends’ responsiveness. In the second
model, perceivers’ perceptions of friends’ responsiveness was
included as an additional predictor. Results are displayed in Table
4. As expected, own responsiveness predicted friend evaluation
and willingness to disclose at both assessment waves in Model 1.
In addition, once perceived friend responsiveness was controlled
for in Model 2, the effects of own responsiveness on willingness to
disclose were eliminated, suggesting full mediation, and the effects
of own responsiveness on friend evaluation were reduced, suggesting partial mediation. Sobel tests confirmed the significance of
indirect effects (own responsiveness 3 perceived partner responsiveness 3 relationship promotion; T1 evaluation z ⫽ 2.89, p ⬍
.01; T2 evaluation z ⫽ 2.79, p ⬍ .01; T1 disclosure z ⫽ 2.45, p ⬍
.05; T2 disclosure z ⫽ 2.01, p ⬍ .05). These results suggest
projection-guided relationship promotion at both assessment
waves; participants who cared for their friends evaluated those
friends more positively and reported greater willingness to disclose
hurt feelings and sadness (Path C in Figure 1), relative to those
who did not care for their friends, largely because they perceived
their friends as caring in return, independent of friends’ selfreported caring.4
We also hypothesized a longitudinal projection/relationshippromotion cycle in which T1 own responsiveness predicts T1 perceived partner responsiveness via projection, T1 perceived partner
responsiveness predicts T2 own responsiveness as a form of
projection-guided relationship promotion, and T2 own responsiveness
predicts T2 perceived partner responsiveness via projection. To reiterate, this cycle posits mediation of temporal stability: Stability of
own responsiveness is, in part, due to the confluence of T1 projection
and longitudinal regulation of responsiveness, and stability of perceived partner responsiveness is, in part, due to the confluence of
longitudinal regulation of responsiveness and T2 projection.
The predictors, criterion variables, and outcomes for the five
models testing the model are displayed in Table 5. (All analyses
are based on dyads with intact data at both assessment waves.) As
predicted by the model, T1 own responsiveness predicted T1
perceived partner responsiveness after controlling for partners’
responsiveness (Model 1), and the effect of T1 own responsiveness
on T2 own responsiveness (temporal stability) was reduced after

controlling for T1 perceived partner responsiveness (compare T1
own responsiveness effects in Models 2 and 3). T1 perceived
partner responsiveness tended to predict residualized change in

4
We also tested whether T1 projection of responsiveness predicted
longitudinal changes in relationship promotion. In these analyses, we
regressed T2 evaluation of friend or willingness to disclose on the same
variable assessed at T1 (to model residualized change) along with T1
perceivers’ own responsiveness and T1 partners’ responsiveness. In a
second model, we included T1 perceivers’ perceptions of partners’ responsiveness. These analyses did not provide evidence for a longitudinal
mediation effect; T1 own responsiveness did not predict residual change in
evaluation or willingness to disclose in the initial models ( ps ⬎ .52), and
perceived partner responsiveness did not predict residual change once it
was included as an additional predictor ( ps ⬎ .10). The temporal stabilities
of willingness to disclose and friend evaluation were substantial, perhaps
reducing effects of other variables.
In addition, although this analytic strategy is a typical means of testing
longitudinal effects, it is very restrictive in terms of the particular process
model it tests. These analyses posit that T1 projected perceptions of a
partner’s responsiveness should have unique effects on T2 evaluation and
self-disclosure after accounting for its effects on current evaluation and
self-disclosure. That is, this analysis presumes that the effect requires time.
However, an effect of perceived partner responsiveness on evaluation or
willingness to disclose actually may happen immediately.
Some (J. Cohen, Cohen, West, & Aiken, 2003) have suggested a different
test of a fast-acting change process. Specifically, an effect of the T2 predictor
on the T2 outcome while controlling for the T1 predictor and the T1 outcome
may suggest a fast-acting change process. Indeed, when we controlled for T1
and T2 partners’ responsiveness, T1 and T2 own responsiveness, T1 perceived
partner responsiveness, and the T1 assessment of the criterion, we found that
T2 own responsiveness predicted both T2 willingness to express vulnerabilities (b ⫽ .96, p ⬍ .001) and T2 partner evaluation (b ⫽ 1.07, p ⬍ .001). These
effects were reduced after we also controlled for T2 perceived partner responsiveness (b ⫽ .56, p ⬍ .05 and b ⫽ .39, p ⫽ .13, respectively). T2 perceived
partner responsiveness predicted both willingness to express vulnerabilities
(b ⫽ .42, p ⬍ .05) and evaluation of partner (b ⫽ .71, p ⬍ .001). Hence,
residual change in own responsiveness appeared to predict residual change in
perceived partner responsiveness, which appeared to predict residual change in
these relationship-promotion outcomes. We do not emphasize these results
because of their ambiguity (i.e., predictors and criterion assessed as the same
point in time).

LEMAY AND CLARK

658

Table 5
Results of Analyses Testing the Projected-Responsiveness/Relationship-Promotion
Cycle (Study 3)
Predicting T1 perceived
friend responsiveness
Predictor variable

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

T1
T1
T1
T2
T2

friends’ responsiveness
own responsiveness
perceived friend responsiveness
friends’ responsiveness
own responsiveness

Predicting T2 own
responsiveness

Predicting T2
perceived friend
responsiveness

Model 1

Model 2

Model 3

Model 4

Model 5

.21*
.86***
—
—
—

⫺.04
.71***
—
—
—

⫺.08
.55***
.19†
—
—

⫺.11
.04
.69***
.09
—

.04
⫺.48**
.51***
⫺.01
.95***

Note. Coefficients are unstandardized coefficients.
†
p ⬍ .10. * p ⬍ .05. ** p ⬍ .01. *** p ⬍ .001.

own responsiveness ( p ⫽ .08; Model 3). The indirect effect (T1
own responsiveness 3 T1 perceived partner responsiveness 3 T2
own responsiveness) approached conventional significance levels
(Sobel’s z ⫽ 1.75, p ⫽ .08), suggesting that the temporal stability
of own responsiveness was partially indirect via a combination of
T1 projection and longitudinal regulation of responsiveness. In
addition, the effect of T1 perceived partner responsiveness on T2
perceived partner responsiveness (temporal stability) was reduced
after controlling for T2 own responsiveness (compare T1 perceived partner responsiveness effects in Models 4 and 5). T2 own
responsiveness predicted T2 perceived partner responsiveness
(Model 5), suggesting T2 projection. The indirect effect (T1 perceived partner responsiveness 3 T2 own responsiveness 3 T2
perceived partner responsiveness) approached conventional significance levels (Sobel’s z ⫽ 1.70, p ⫽ .09), suggesting that temporal
stability in perceived partner responsiveness was partially indirect
via a combination of longitudinal regulation of responsiveness and
T2 projection.5

Summary
This study provided support for our model of projection-guided
relationship promotion. Participants who cared for their friends
claimed to be more willing to express feelings of hurt and sadness
to those friends than did participants who did not care for their
friends, and this appeared to be due to tendencies for participants
to presume that their care was reciprocated, even after controlling
for friends’ self-reported care. Likewise, participants who cared
for their friends evaluated their friends more positively than did
participants who did not care for their friends, in part because those
who cared thought that that care was reciprocated. Caring itself
appeared to be regulated over time with earlier projected perceptions, partially explaining why those who initially cared for friends
maintained that caring over time.

Study 4
Given that (a) the indirect effects in tests of the longitudinal
projected-responsiveness relationship-promotion cycle in Study 3
were marginal, (b) the pattern of effects supporting the cycle is
complex and has not yet been replicated elsewhere, and (c)
whether or not the cycle pertains to romantic relationships is

unknown, we sought to replicate these findings in a marriage
study.

Method
Participants and Procedure
Soon-to-be-married heterosexual couples residing in the Pittsburgh, PA, area were recruited by a variety of means, including
bridal fairs, the bridal registry at a local department store, ads in
local newsletters, flyers, electronic bulletin boards, and word of
mouth. Couples were eligible if they had never been married, were
childless, and were scheduled to be married in the near future.
Participants were predominately well-educated (80% finished college). On average, husbands were 27 years old and wives were 26
years old at the start of the study, although ages ranged from 20 to
38 years.
Couples completed consent forms and questionnaires in their
own homes a few weeks before their wedding day (T1; N ⫽ 108
couples) and completed mailed questionnaires at their homes just
after the 2nd year of marriage (T2; M ⫽ 25 months after wedding;
N ⫽ 96 couples). Participants were instructed to refrain from
sharing their questionnaire responses with their partners. All analyses are based on data from couples who completed both assessments.6

5
We tested whether perceivers’ gender moderated any of the effects.
Gender did not moderate either of the concurrent projection effects, nor did
gender moderate effects of own responsiveness or perceived partner responsiveness on expression of vulnerability or on temporal changes in own
responsiveness. However, gender did moderate the effect of T1 perceived
partner responsiveness on T1 evaluation of partner (b ⫽ .51, p ⬍ .001).
The effect was stronger for men (b ⫽ .75, p ⬍ .001) than for women (b ⫽
.24, p ⫽ .09). However, this effect was not replicated at T2 or in any of the
other studies, was not predicted, and was found in the context of testing
many gender interactions. Hence, it may have been found by chance.
6
Data from this study were also reported in Lemay, Clark, and Feeney
(2007), Study 2. Findings regarding the longitudinal projection/
relationship-promotion cycle were not reported in that research, although
findings regarding concurrent projection of responsiveness were reported.

PROJECTION OF COMMUNAL RESPONSIVENESS

659

Table 6
Correlation Matrix of Variables (Study 4)
Variable
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.

T1
T1
T1
T1
T2
T2
T2
T2

husbands’ responsiveness
wives’ responsiveness
husbands’ PPR
wives’ PPR
husbands’ responsiveness
wives’ responsiveness
husbands’ PPR
wives’ PPR

1
—

2
.10
—

3

4

***

*

.54
.22*
—

.20
.70***
.29**
—

5
***

.54
⫺.02
.40***
.03
—

6
.16
.50***
.19†
.42***
.13
—

7
***

.33
.01
.44***
.14
.62***
.29**
—

8
.07
.30***
.13
.43***
.11
.56***
.41***
—

Note. PPR ⫽ perceived partner responsiveness.
p ⬍ .10. * p ⬍ .05. ** p ⬍ .01. *** p ⬍ .001.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

†

Measures
Own responsiveness to partner’s needs. Participants completed a measure of communal strength (Mills, Clark, Ford &
Johnson, 2004)—a quantitative aspect of communal relationships
reflecting the degree of motivation to be responsive to a specific
communal partner’s needs. The 10 items were answered on a 10-point
response scale (0 ⫽ not at all, 10 ⫽ extremely). In the current study,
this measure was completed in reference to the respondent’s motivation to care for his or her spouse (e.g., “How far would you be willing
to go to help your spouse?” “How much would you be willing to give
to benefit your spouse?”; T1 ␣ ⫽ .64, T2 ␣ ⫽ .76).
Perceived partner responsiveness. Perceptions of partner responsiveness to one’s needs were assessed with a modified version
of the communal-strength measure (e.g., “How far would your
spouse be willing to go to help you?”). Items were answered on the
same response scale (T1 ␣ ⫽ .82, T2 ␣ ⫽ .86).

Results and Discussion
First, we tested effects with a series of multilevel models (using
the SAS MIXED procedure) in which intercepts varied randomly
across dyads to account for the nested data structure. Indirect
effects were formally tested (cf. Baron & Kenny, 1986). Following
this, we used a path analysis to test the fit of the entire model.
Correlations of all study variables appear in Table 6.
The predictors, criterion variables, and outcomes for the five
models testing the longitudinal projection-promotion cycle are
displayed in Table 7. The coefficients are unstandardized, averaged within-dyad slopes. As predicted by the model, own responsiveness predicted perceived partner responsiveness after controlling for partners’ responsiveness (Model 1), and the effect of T1
own responsiveness on T2 own responsiveness (temporal stability)
was reduced after controlling for T1 perceived partner responsiveness (compare T1 own responsiveness effects in Models 2 and 3).
T1 perceived partner responsiveness predicted residualized change
in own responsiveness (Model 3). The indirect effect (T1 own
responsiveness 3 T1 perceived partner responsiveness 3 T2 own
responsiveness) was significant (Sobel’s z ⫽ 1.97, p ⬍ .05),
suggesting that the temporal stability of own responsiveness was
partially mediated by a combination of T1 projection and longitudinal regulation of responsiveness. In addition, the effect of T1
perceived partner responsiveness on T2 perceived partner responsiveness (temporal stability) was reduced after controlling for T2
own responsiveness (compare T1 perceived partner responsiveness

effects in Models 4 and 5). T2 own responsiveness predicted T2
perceived partner responsiveness (Model 5). The indirect effect
(T1 perceived partner responsiveness 3 T2 own responsiveness
3 T2 perceived partner responsiveness) was significant (Sobel’s
z ⫽ 1.93, p ⫽ .05), suggesting that temporal stability in perceived
partner responsiveness was partially indirect, mediated by a combination of longitudinal regulation of responsiveness and T2 projection.
Path analysis, tested with the SAS CALIS procedure, also was
performed to test the fit of the entire model. The analyses used the
maximum-likelihood method of parameter estimation on the
variance– covariance matrix. The tested model and estimated standardized path coefficients are displayed in Figure 5. Wives’ and
husbands’ variances, error terms, and paths were constrained to be
equal. An initial model estimated husband–wife covariances
among all variables to model dyadic interdependence, but the
covariances for T1 own responsiveness, T1 perceived partner
responsiveness, and T2 own responsiveness were miniscule and
not significant. To simplify results, we dropped these covariances
from the model. (Doing so did not meaningfully affect model fit
statistics or the estimated parameters.) Path coefficients were consistent with findings from the multilevel models and with our
predictions, suggesting that own responsiveness was projected at
T1 (effect of T1 own responsiveness on T1 perceptions), that
projected perceptions predicted longitudinal changes in own responsiveness (effect of T1 perceptions on T2 own responsiveness),
and that changes in own responsiveness were projected (effect of
T2 own responsiveness on T2 perceptions). At both time waves, a
small kernel of truth in perceptions of responsiveness was also
evident (effect of partners’ responsiveness on perceptions of responsiveness). This model was an excellent fit to the data (GFI ⫽
.94, CFI ⫽ 1, non-normed fit index ⫽ .99, RMSEA ⫽ .02), ␹2(23,
N ⫽ 96) ⫽ 24.25, ns. This study replicates the longitudinal
projection-promotion cycle findings of Study 3.7

Study 5
We view the projection of responsiveness as a dyadic phenomenon. Specifically, those who care for a particular partner’s welfare and are motivated to provide support to that partner are
thought to project this responsiveness onto the partner, seeing that
partner as similarly caring. The projection model does not assume
7

Perceivers’ gender did not significantly moderate any of the effects.

LEMAY AND CLARK

660

Table 7
Results of Analyses Testing the Projected-Responsiveness/Relationship-Promotion Cycle (Study 4)
Predicting T1 perceived
partner responsiveness
Predictor variable

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

T1
T1
T1
T2
T2

partners’ responsiveness
own responsiveness
perceived partner responsiveness
partners’ responsiveness
own responsiveness

Predicting T2 own
responsiveness

Predicting T2 perceived
partner responsiveness

Model 1

Model 2

Model 3

Model 4

Model 5

.22*
.94***
—
—
—

.06
.63***
—
—
—

.04
.52***
.12*
—
—

0
.17
.40***
⫺.01
—

⫺.19
⫺.27†
.32***
.24*
.80***

Note. Coefficients are unstandardized coefficients.
†
p ⬍ .10. * p ⬍ .05. *** p ⬍ .001.

that perceivers are similarly responsive toward all their relationship partners or that perceivers see similar levels of responsiveness
from all of their relationship partners. In addition, the model does
not assume that target partners elicit similar levels of responsiveness from all of their partners or that they are perceived as
similarly responsive by all of their partners. In Study 5, we
examined in three-person groups the extent to which responsiveness and perceived partner responsiveness are due to perceiver
factors or target factors, or are specific to relationships.
Moreover, this group study allowed us to include an informant’s
perceptions of the target partner’s responsiveness to the perceiver
as an additional index of the target partner’s actual responsiveness.
Using a hypothetical triad as an example, this means that, when
predicting Kerry’s perceptions of Andy’s communal responsiveness toward her, we controlled for Andy’s self-reported responsiveness to Kerry as well as Ed’s reports of Andy’s responsiveness
to Kerry. To the extent that outside observers are less biased (or at
least differentially biased) than the target person in reporting on
the target person’s responsiveness to the perceiver, this allows for
a more comprehensive assessment of the accuracy of perceivers’
perceptions and for a more stringent estimation of the projection
effect. (Kerry’s own responsiveness to Andy must uniquely bias
her perceptions of Andy’s responsiveness to her after removing
variance shared with Andy’s self-reported responsiveness to Kerry
and Ed’s perceptions of Andy’s responsiveness to Kerry.) Although the partner’s self-reported responsiveness and an outsider’s
view of that partner’s responsiveness are each imperfect accuracy
benchmarks, together they may present a closer approximation of
the partner’s true communal responsiveness than would studies of
accuracy and projection bias that use only one of these information
sources (see also Murray, Holmes, Dolderman, & Griffin, 2000).
In addition, we tested effects of projection of responsiveness on
a variety of indices of relationship promotion, including support
provision, self-disclosure, and evaluation of the partner. Through
the projection process, those who care for partners may develop
the motivation and trust necessary to provide support, disclose
personal aspects of themselves, and see virtues in the partner (Path
C in Figure 1). Moreover, we tested whether the two behavioral
forms of perceivers’ relationship promotion (support provision and
self-disclosure) were detected by partners.

Method
Participants and Procedure
Initial participants were recruited via advertisements posted on
Internet bulletin boards for participation in an electronic survey in

exchange for a payment of $10. To reduce error variance associated with age, we indicated that only individuals between the ages
of 18 and 30 years were eligible for participation. Those who
expressed interest in the study were asked to recruit two other
individuals for participation who were between the ages of 18 and
30 years, who knew each other, who did not share a biological or
romantic relationship with the initial participant or with each other,
and at least one of whom was a close friend of the initial participant. (They were instructed that the remaining participant could
also be a close friend but that this was not necessary.) Groups in
which one or more of the three members failed to complete the
questionnaire did not meet the study criteria, and given that the
planned analyses required data from all three group members, their
data were not included in analyses. Fifty-three triads completed the
questionnaire, but data from two triads and two observations in a
third triad were necessarily eliminated from analyses because of
missing data on the measures of primary interest, resulting in 304
usable observations in which a perceiver rated the responsiveness
of a target and in which data for relevant control variables were
available (as described in the Analysis Strategy section below).
The 153 participants included 51 men and 102 women, with an
average age of 24.63 years. Relationships were predominately
described as friendships (73.5%), with most of the remaining
participants described as coworkers, classmates, or roommates.8
Participants were instructed to refrain from discussing the study or
sharing their answers with the other participants while data collection was in progress.

Measures
Own responsiveness. Participants completed two measures of
their own communal responsiveness to each of the other triad
members. The first was a 10-item measure adapted from Mills et
al. (2004; i.e., “I care for this person’s needs,” “I would sacrifice
very much to help this person,” “I can easily put this person’s
needs out of my thoughts,” “I would incur a large cost in order to
help this person,” “I could easily accept not helping this person,”
“I would go out of my way to help this person,” “I would be
reluctant to sacrifice for this person,” “I care about this person’s
8

A few of the initial participants recruited relationship partners who did
not fit the study criteria. Eleven participants were over 30 years of age, and
four relationships were described as family or romantic. Because the
analyses produced identical results regardless of whether data on these
participants were included, we retained their data in the analyses.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

PROJECTION OF COMMUNAL RESPONSIVENESS

Figure 5. Results of path analysis (Study 4). †p ⬍ .10. *p ⬍ .05.
partner responsiveness.

well-being,” “Helping this person is a high priority for me,” “I care
about this person”) completed on a 9-point response scale (1 ⫽
strongly disagree, 9 ⫽ strongly agree). Negatively worded items
were reverse scored (␣ ⫽ .92). The second was a three-item
measure (i.e., “How motivated are you to attend to this person’s
needs?” “How motivated are you to provide emotional support to
this person when he/she is stressed?” “How motivated are you to
help this person out [e.g., do favors for him/her]?”) completed on
a 5-point response scale (1 ⫽ not at all motivated, 5 ⫽ extremely
motivated; ␣ ⫽ .96). Scores on these two measures were highly
correlated (r ⫽ .84).
Perceived partner responsiveness. Two analogous measures
assessed perceptions of each partner’s responsiveness to the self
(e.g., “This person cares for my needs,” “How motivated is this
person to attend to your needs?”) and were completed on identical
response scales (10-item measure ␣ ⫽ .91; 3-item measure ␣ ⫽
.94) Scores on these measures were highly correlated (r ⫽ .83).
Informant perceptions of partner responsiveness. Participants
indicated the responsiveness of each group member to the other
member on two analogous measures (e.g., “A cares for B’s needs,”
“How motivated is A to attend to B’s needs?”) using identical
response scales (10-item measure ␣ ⫽ .92; 3-item measure ␣ ⫽
.95.) Scores on the two measures were highly correlated (r ⫽ .82).
Support provision. Participants indicated the frequency with
which they enacted 11 supportive behaviors toward each member
in the past 30 days. The behaviors were the 11 that correlated
highest with the total score during development of the Inventory of
Socially Supportive Behaviors (Barrera, Sandler, & Ramsay,
1981): “Gave him/her some information to help him/her understand a situation he/she was in,” “Told him/her that he/she was OK
just the way he/she is,” “Agreed that what he/she wanted to do was
right,” “Listened to him/her talk about his/her private feelings,”
“Said things that made his/her situation clearer and easier to
understand,” “Told him/her that you feel very close to him/her,”
“Told him/her that you would keep the things that you talk about
private—just between the two you,” “Checked back with him/her
to see if he/she followed the advice you gave,” “Gave him/her
feedback on how he/she was doing without saying it was good or
bad,” “Joked and kidded to try to cheer him/her up.” Items were
completed on a 5-point response scale (1 ⫽ not at all, 5 ⫽ about
every day; ␣ ⫽ .97).
Partners’ perceptions of support provision. Participants completed an analogous measure to indicate their perceptions of each
member’s provision of support to the self using the same 5-point
response scale (␣ ⫽ .97).

**

p ⬍ .01.

***

661

p ⬍ .001. PPR ⫽ perceived

Interaction frequency. Using the same 5-point response scale,
participants completed a single-item measure of the frequency
with which they interacted with each of the group members in the
last 30 days (i.e., “How often have you communicated [either in
person, on the phone, or over e-mail] with this person in the past
30 days?”). This was used as a control variable in analyses of
support provision because the support provision scores are partially confounded with interaction frequency.
Self-disclosure. Participants completed the Self-Disclosure Index (Miller, Berg, & Archer, 1983) to indicate the extent to which
they disclosed 10 aspects of themselves to each of their group
members (“my personal habits,” “things I have done which I feel
guilty about,” “things I wouldn’t do in public,” “my deepest
feelings,” “what I like and dislike about myself,” “what is important to me in life,” “what makes me the person I am,” “my worst
fears,” “things I have done which I am proud of,” “my close
relationships with other people”). Items were completed on a
5-point response scale (1 ⫽ not at all, 5 ⫽ discussed fully and
completely; ␣ ⫽ .96).
Partners’ perceptions of self-disclosure. Participants completed a measure (analogous to the measure of self-disclosure) of
their perceptions of each member’s disclosure to the self using the
same 5-point response scale (␣ ⫽ .97).
Evaluation of partner. Participants indicated the extent to
which five positive social attributes (i.e., witty and humorous, open
and disclosing, sociable and extroverted, socially competent, and
good leader) described each group member on a 9-point response
scale (1 ⫽ not at all characteristic, 9 ⫽ completely characteristic;
␣ ⫽ .82).

Results and Discussion
Analysis Strategy
We used a series of cross-classified multilevel models to test
hypotheses. We used different models to test hypotheses regarding
variance partitioning, projection of responsiveness, and consequences of projection.
Strategy for variance partitioning. We used the Social Relations Model (SRM; Kenny, 1994) to test hypotheses regarding the
sources of variability in own responsiveness and perceived partner
responsiveness. In the SRM, perceiver variance represents tendencies for participants to view multiple targets in a similar manner.
Target variance represents tendencies for participants to be viewed
by multiple perceivers in a similar manner. These effects refer to

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

662

LEMAY AND CLARK

persons perceiving and being perceived by multiple others in
consistent ways, respectively. The SRM also estimates dyadic
reciprocity, a correlation of perceptions within dyads. This effect
can also be thought of as dyad-level variance: tendencies for
relationship means (as averaged across two partners) to vary across
dyads. The SRM can also estimate variance due to group. The
remaining variance in the data after removing these effects can be
interpreted as variance indicative of idiosyncratic perceptions:
variance in perceptions that cannot be accounted for by perceivers’
tendencies to see others in consistent ways, by tendencies for
targets to be seen by others in consistent ways, by group-level
phenomena, or by the target’s reciprocated perceptions of the
perceiver. This remaining variance also includes variance due to
measurement error, and multiple measurements of the same perception must be used to distinguish the two.
The projection-of-responsiveness model posits a specific patterning of variance in own responsiveness and perceived partner
responsiveness. The projection process is presumed to be a
relationship-specific phenomenon; people have varying levels of
responsiveness to particular partners and (because of projection)
perceive varying levels of responsiveness from those partners.
Sometimes partners come to reciprocate one’s own level of responsiveness. (This might happen often because of a number of
processes, such as the kernel of truth in partner’s perceptions and
their reacting to that perceived kernel of truth by regulating their
own responsiveness.) In those cases, projection of responsiveness
would yield judgments of partner responsiveness that are correlated across partners. In other cases, the partners do not reciprocate
responsiveness. In these cases, projection of responsiveness would
yield judgments that are uncorrelated across partners. Thus, for
both own responsiveness and perceived partner responsiveness, we
predicted substantial dyad variance (in the case of reciprocated
responsiveness and perceptions thereof) and idiosyncratic perception variance (in the case of lack of reciprocation).
The projection model does not predict variance due to perceiver (such as tendencies to care about all partners, to perceive
all partners as caring for the self, or to complete similar measures in a similar manner) or target (such as tendencies for all
people to perceive a target person as caring, perhaps because of
that person’s personality). Likewise, the projection model does
not specifically posit that perceived partner responsiveness is
primarily a group-level phenomenon. Thus, we expected more
dyadic and idiosyncratic variability than perceiver, target, and
group variability.
A series of unconditional (intercept-only) cross-classified multilevel models, tested with SAS PROC MIXED (adapted from
recommendations by Kenny, 2006), decomposed the variance of
own responsiveness and perceived partner responsiveness into
these various components. In these analyses, the two measures of
the outcome variable (own responsiveness or perceived partner
responsiveness) were standardized across the sample and treated as
separate indicators (doubling the number of observations). This
provided a means of distinguishing idiosyncratic perception variance from variance due to measurement error. Intercepts were
modeled as randomly varying across group, perceiver, target,
dyad, and idiosyncratic perception classifications. SAS PROC
MIXED discerned whether the variance was greater than zero by
producing tests of the significance for these random components.
In these variance-decomposition models, no fixed-effect predictors
of the outcome variable were modeled.9

Strategy to test projection of responsiveness. To continue accounting for the data structure, in subsequent analyses, we added
(uncentered) fixed-effect predictors to test projection of responsiveness while modeling intercepts as varying across the classifications described above (cf. Kashy & Kenny, 2000). As discussed
previously, two indicators of the partner’s actual responsiveness
were used, including the target partner’s self-reported responsiveness to the perceiver and the third individual’s perceptions of the
target partner’s responsiveness to the perceiver (“informant perceptions”). (To use a hypothetical example, we expected Kerry’s
own caring for Andy to bias her perceptions of how much Andy
cares for her, even after we controlled for Andy’s self-reported
caring for Kerry and Ed’s reports of how much Andy cares for
Kerry.) Thus, perceived partner responsiveness was regressed on
own responsiveness (projection; Path A in Figure 1), partners’
self-reported responsiveness (an index of accuracy; Path B in
Figure 1), and informants’ perceptions (another index of accuracy;
Path B in Figure 1). In addition to examining the strength of fixed
effects, we also examined the extent to which the fixed-effect
model accounts for variances identified in the unconditional
model.
Strategy to test consequences of projection. We used a variation of this modeling strategy to test hypotheses regarding effects
of projection on relationship promotion (support provision, selfdisclosure, and partner evaluation). Only one measure of each of
these constructs was collected, so these models did not distinguish
idiosyncratic perception variance from variance due to measurement error. We averaged standardized scores from the two measures of own responsiveness, perceived partner responsiveness,
and informant perceptions to create composite indices, which were
used in these analyses.
Initial unconditional (intercept-only) models decomposed
variance in promotion variables into group, perceiver, target,
dyad, and idiosyncratic perception (including measurement error) components. In a subsequent model, own responsiveness
and the two accuracy-control variables (partners’ self-reported
responsiveness and informant perceptions of partners’ responsiveness) were included as fixed effects. The final model included these predictors as well as the fixed effect of perceived
partner responsiveness (Path C in Figure 1). The projection
model posits that, independent of accuracy effects, perceivers’
own communal responsiveness to target partners will predict
indices of relationship promotion. This effect should be rendered insignificant (in the case of full mediation) or substantially reduced (in the case of partial mediation) once perceivers’
perception of the target partner’s responsiveness is included as
an additional predictor. The significances of the indirect effects
were also formally tested (Baron & Kenny, 1986). Given that
9

SRM analyses of three-person groups require that one of the components of the model is not estimated. The particular analysis strategy used in
the current research does not estimate the correlation between perceiver
and target effects (e.g., tendencies for those who perceive others in general
as responsive to be perceived by others in general as responsive). As it
turns out, this is not a serious limitation to the current analysis strategy
because of the nearly nonexistent target-variance components for most
measures (especially perceived partner responsiveness). The SAS PROC
MIXED approach to testing the SRM produces parameter estimates that are
nearly identical to those produced by other procedures for testing the SRM
(Kenny, 2006; see also Snijders & Kenny, 1999).

PROJECTION OF COMMUNAL RESPONSIVENESS

variance also suggests a significant degree of withinrelationship independence in responsiveness across partners
(21–26% of the total explainable variance). That is, the two
partners’ reports of communal responsiveness and perceived
partner responsiveness varied significantly within relationships.
Variance components for measures of support provision and
disclosure suggest a similar pattern. Across these variables, the
relationship-specific variance components (dyad and idiosyncratic
perception) tended to be greater than the perceiver, target, and
group variance components. Unlike the other variables, both perceiver and target variances in partner evaluation also were significant, suggesting some tendency for participants to evaluate the
two targets in a similar way and for participants to be evaluated by
the two perceivers in a similar way. This pattern of greater perceiver and target variances in trait perception than in more affectladen perceptions (i.e., responsiveness) is consistent with other
findings (Kenny, 1994).
The variance components for informants’ perceptions revealed
no idiosyncratic variance and a large amount of dyad variance,
suggesting that participants viewed the relationship between the
two other participants as mutual (i.e., again, using our hypothetical
example, Ed’s perceptions of Andy’s responsiveness to Kerry were
strongly correlated with Ed’s perceptions of Kerry’s responsiveness to Andy). A tendency for people to view others’ relationships
as mutual has been reported previously in regard to liking (Frey &
Smith, 1993; Kenny, Bond, Mohr, & Horn, 1996). The current
research suggests a similar tendency to perceive mutual responsiveness in others’ relationships.

the responses to the social-support measure were partly determined by recent interaction frequency, analyses of socialsupport provision included recent interaction frequency as an
additional fixed effect (e.g., a perceiver may provide support on
100% of interactions but only provide support on 1 day because
he or she interacted with the target on only 1 day). Finally, we
tested whether perceivers’ relationship promotion would be
detected by partners by examining effects of perceivers’ selfreported support provision and self-disclosure on partners’ perceptions, controlling for all of the other variables described
above.

Correlations
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

663

A correlation matrix of all variables appears in Table 8.

Variance Partitioning
SRM variance components are displayed in Table 9. As
expected, the two relationship-specific variance components
(idiosyncratic and dyad) of own responsiveness and perceptions
of partner responsiveness were significant and outweighed
group, perceiver, and target variance. Approximately two thirds
of the total variance (and approximately 86% of the variance
not due to measurement error) was explained by dyad and
idiosyncratic perception effects. These results are consistent
with our expectations that communal responsiveness and perceived partner responsiveness are largely relationship-specific;
people reported varying levels of responsiveness toward their
relationship partners, and they perceived varying levels of
responsiveness from their relationship partners. The significant
dyad variance suggests that own responsiveness and perceived
partner responsiveness toward particular partners are, in part,
dyadic phenomena in which the two partners’ scores are correlated (i.e., dyadic reciprocity). Whereas dyadic reciprocity has
been documented in regard to attraction (Kenny, 1994), to our
knowledge, these are the first data providing empirical evidence
that felt communal responsiveness and perceptions of partner
responsiveness exhibit dyadic reciprocity. Such findings provide support for the idea that most adult relationships are
characterized by some degree of mutuality in level of responsiveness and perceptions of partner responsiveness (Clark &
Mills, 1993). However, the significant idiosyncratic perception

Projection of Responsiveness
Next we regressed perceptions of partner responsiveness on
own responsiveness (projection), target partners’ self-reported
responsiveness (an index of accuracy), and informants’ perceptions of target partners’ responsiveness to perceivers (another
index of accuracy). Both target partners’ self-reported responsiveness to perceivers and informants’ perceptions of target
partners’ responsiveness to perceivers predicted perceivers’
perceptions (b ⫽ .11, p ⬍ .001 and b ⫽ .12, p ⬍ .001,
respectively), suggesting some accuracy in perceptions of responsiveness. Suggesting projection of responsiveness, perceivers’ own responsiveness to targets was a significant predictor of

Table 8
Correlation Matrix of Variables (Study 5)
Variable
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.

Own responsiveness
Perceived partner responsiveness
Perceived partner responsiveness to third person
Support provision
Self-disclosure
Evaluation of partner
Perceived partner support provision
Perceived partner disclosure

1
***

.60
.60***
.13*
.42***
.47***
.27***
.40***
.49***

2
***

.87
.62***
.18**
.44***
.45***
.30***
.40***
.48***

3
***

.28
.32***
.08
.08
.06
.13*
.06
.10†

4
***

.54
.55***
.11†
.71***
.57***
.22**
.70***
.59***

5
***

.64
.66***
.13*
.73***
.62***
.27***
.49***
.69***

6
***

.38
.44***
.31***
.29***
.37***
.36***
.15*
.24***

7
***

.54
.60***
.17**
.90***
.73***
.36***
.64***
.57***

8
.58***
.60***
.12*
.76***
.87***
.34***
.70***
.69***

Note. Values on the diagonal (which is indicated by boldface values) are pairwise intraclass correlations, which are the correlations of the two partners’
reports. Values above the diagonal are bivariate intrapersonal intraclass correlations, reflecting the association of two variables measured on the same
partner. Values below the diagonal are bivariate interpersonal intraclass correlations, reflecting the association of two variables measured on different
partners. All correlations were computed using the double-entry method (cf. Griffin & Gonzalez, 1995; Kenny, Kashy, & Cook, 2006).
†
p ⬍ .10. * p ⬍ .05. ** p ⬍ .01. *** p ⬍ .001.

LEMAY AND CLARK

664
Table 9
Variance Decomposition of Variables (Study 5)
Variable

Group

Perceiver

Target

Dyad

Own responsiveness
Perceived partner responsiveness
Informant perceptions of responsiveness
Support provision
Self-disclosure
Evaluation of partner
Perceived partner support provision
Perceived partner self-disclosure

0 (0)
.06 (.06)
.07 (.07)
.37** (.27)
.24* (.19)
.72** (.28)
.35** (.28)
.31** (.24)

.12** (.12)
.05 (.05)
.01 (.01)
.16** (.12)
.25*** (.20)
.47*** (.18)
.23*** (.18)
.14** (.11)

0 (0)
0 (0)
.03 (.03)
0 (0)
0 (0)
.71*** (.27)
0 (0)
0 (0)

.54*** (.55)
.51*** (.51)
.72*** (.72)
.57*** (.42)
.55*** (.43)
.21* (.08)
.46*** (.36)
.56*** (.44)

Idiosyncratica
.18*** (.18)
.22*** (.22)
0 (0)
.27*** (.19)
.24*** (.19)
.46*** (.18)
.24*** (.19)
.28*** (.22)

Note. Values in parentheses are proportions of total variance.
For models decomposing variance of own responsiveness, perceived partner responsiveness, and informant perceptions, idiosyncratic variance is
independent of measurement error. Error variances of own responsiveness, perceived partner responsiveness, and informant perceptions were .16 (.16), .17
(.17), and .17 (.17), respectively ( ps ⬍ .001).
*
p ⬍ .05. ** p ⬍ .01. *** p ⬍ .001.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

a

perceived partner responsiveness while controlling for these
accuracy effects (b ⫽ .68, p ⬍ .001). The projection effect was
notably stronger than the accuracy effects.10
Recall that dyad and idiosyncratic perception were the two
significant variance components for perceived partner responsiveness (see Table 9). Nearly all (97%) of the dyad variance and much
(68%) of idiosyncratic perception variance was eliminated after
modeling projection and accuracy. Residual dyad variance (.02)
was no longer significant, although residual idiosyncratic perception variance (.07) was still significant ( p ⬍ .01). Thus, the fixed
effects, which can largely be attributed to projection effects,
largely accounted for why perceptions of partner responsiveness
were correlated across partners within relationships (because communal responsiveness was correlated across partners and was
projected) and why perceptions of partner responsiveness were, in
part, idiosyncratic to specific perceiver–target pairings (because
communal responsiveness was, in part, idiosyncratic to specific
perceiver–target pairings and was projected).11

Relationship Promotion
Table 10 displays results of the analyses predicting indices of
perceivers’ relationship promotion (support provision, selfdisclosure, and evaluation of partner). In Model 1, these variables
were regressed on the three predictors of perceived partner responsiveness described previously (perceivers’ own communal responsiveness toward targets and the two accuracy indices). In Model 2,
perceivers’ perception of target partners’ responsiveness was included as an additional predictor. We predicted that caring perceivers would be more willing to promote relationships, even after
controlling for indices of the partner’s responsiveness to them, and
that these effects would be, in part, explained by caring perceivers’
tendencies to project.
As expected, own communal responsiveness predicted each of
the outcome variables in Model 1, and perceived partner responsiveness predicted each of the outcome variables in Model 2. In
Model 2, the effect of own responsiveness on evaluation of the
partner was insignificant, suggesting full mediation. In addition,
effects of own responsiveness on support provision and selfdisclosure remained significant but were substantially reduced

10
Including both target partners’ self-reported responsiveness and informants’ perceptions in the same analysis may have reduced the accuracy
estimate (given that they are both used as an index of accuracy). Thus,
additional analyses included an average of these scores as an accuracycomposite index. This analysis revealed the same pattern of greater projection effects (b ⫽ .68, p ⬍ .001) than accuracy effects (b ⫽ .24, p ⬍
.001).
The lack of significant perceiver and target variance in the initial
variance-partitioning analyses helped to rule out the possibility that the
relationship between own responsiveness and perceived partner responsiveness was due to perceiver effects (such as shared-method variance or
tendencies to see all others as responsive) or target effects (such as having
generally responsive partners). To be sure, we also conducted traditional
multilevel analyses that controlled for perceiver and target effects through
inclusion of fixed effects. Specifically, we conducted three-level models,
specifying two target partners as nested within perceivers and the three
perceivers as nested within groups. We then regressed perceived target
partners’ responsiveness on own responsiveness, the two accuracy benchmarks, and two additional variables: perceivers’ perceptions of third persons’ responsiveness to the self (which controlled for perceiver effects) and
third persons’ perceptions of target partners’ responsiveness to the self
(which controlled for target effects). In these models, the projection (own
responsiveness) effect was nearly identical to that described in the text
(b ⫽ .71, p ⬍ .001), as were the effects of partners’ self-reported responsiveness (b ⫽ .09, p ⬍ .001) and the informants’ reports (b ⫽ .09, p ⬍
.001). The same was the case when we controlled for perceiver and target
effects in regard to own responsiveness. These analyses provide additional
evidence that the projection-of-responsiveness effect cannot be explained
by factors such as individual differences in propensities to see or be seen
by others as responsive to the self or shared source and method variance.
We do not present these analyses in detail because they are not optimal. By
treating third persons’ perceptions of targets’ responsiveness as a covariate
in one observation and as an outcome in another observation, these analyses test nonrecursive models with a recursive analysis.
11
To obtain a better sense of the variance of perceived partner responsiveness explained by own responsiveness, we tested another model that
included only own responsiveness as a predictor of perceived partner
responsiveness. The residual variance components were similar (dyad ⫽
.02, idiosyncratic ⫽ .04), as were estimates of variance explained (dyad ⫽
.95, idiosyncratic ⫽ .81). These analyses confirm that own responsiveness
explained most of the idiosyncratic and dyad variance in perceived partner
responsiveness.

PROJECTION OF COMMUNAL RESPONSIVENESS

665

Table 10
Effects of Predictor Variables on Indices of Relationship Promotion as a Function of Controlling
for Perceived Partner Responsiveness (Study 5)
Model 1
Variable

Coefficient

Model 2
t

Coefficient

t

Support provision

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Perceivers’ own responsiveness
Target partner’s self-reported responsiveness
Informant’s perception
Interaction frequency
Perceived partner responsiveness

.34
.11
.03
.38
—

6.15***
2.35*
0.63
7.98***
—

.20
.10
.02
.39
.17

2.26*
2.00*
0.31
8.08***
2.00*

13.76***
2.61**
4.54***
—

.34
.09
.17
.37

4.45***
2.18*
3.76***
4.78***

5.37***
1.48
⫺1.60
—

.08
.09
⫺.16
.47

Self-disclosure
Perceivers’ own responsiveness
Target partner’s reported responsiveness
Informant’s perception
Perceived partner responsiveness

.64
.11
.20
—
Evaluation of partner

Perceivers’ own responsiveness
Target partner’s reported responsiveness
Informant’s perception
Perceived partner responsiveness
*

p ⬍ .05.

**

p ⬍ .01.

***

.44
.13
⫺.14
—

.53
.98
⫺1.98
3.07**

p ⬍ .001.

after we controlled for perceived partner responsiveness, suggesting
partial mediation. Tests of the indirect effects of own communal
responsiveness affecting the outcome variable via an effect on perceived partner responsiveness were significant (support provision z ⫽
1.99, p ⬍ .05; self-disclosure z ⫽ 4.67, p ⬍ .001; evaluation of partner
z ⫽ 3.04, p ⬍ .01). These analyses confirm the significance of indirect
effects of own responsiveness on relationship promotion via subjective perceptions of partners’ responsiveness.

Observable Relationship Promotion?
We expected that perceivers’ behavioral relationship promotion
would be noticed by partners. To test this idea, we regressed
partners’ perceptions of perceivers’ support provision or selfdisclosure on perceivers’ self-reported provision or disclosure
while controlling for all of the predictors of perceivers’ relationship promotion described previously (i.e., perceivers’ responsiveness to partners, the two accuracy benchmarks, perceived partner
responsiveness, interaction frequency in the model predicting perceived support provision). Perceivers’ self-reported support provision predicted partners’ perceptions of perceivers’ support provision (b ⫽ .32, p ⬍ .001), and perceivers’ self-reported selfdisclosure predicted partners’ perceptions of perceivers’ disclosure
(b ⫽ .41, p ⬍ .001). Thus, perceivers’ behavioral relationship
promotion appeared to have been detected by partners.12

Summary
Consistent with expectations that the projection of responsiveness is a relationship-specific phenomenon, results of the
current study suggest that own responsiveness and perceived
partner responsiveness varied most from one relationship to the
next and across specific perceiver–target pairings. In contrast,
own and perceived responsiveness did not substantially vary

across perceivers, targets, or groups. Such variance is necessary
to form arguments about influences of individual differences in
tendencies to see others as responsive or about shared-method
variance. Moreover, most of the relationship-specific and idiosyncratic variance in perceived partner responsiveness was explained by own responsiveness, suggesting that perceivers projected their own caring for particular partners onto those
partners’ caring for them. Projection appeared to explain why
perceptions of partner responsiveness were idiosyncratic to
specific perceiver–target pairings (because own responsiveness
was idiosyncratic) and why perceptions of partner responsiveness were somewhat correlated across the two partners within a
dyad (because own responsiveness was correlated). This was
the case after we controlled for two individuals’ (the partner’s
and the third person’s) reports of how much partners really
cared for perceivers. Finally, these apparent tendencies to
project own responsiveness appeared to guide perceivers’ willingness to promote relationships. Those who cared for their
partners appeared willing to enact supportive behaviors, disclose aspects of the self, and evaluate the partner positively, in
12
We tested whether perceivers’ gender moderated any of the effects.
Gender did not significantly moderate the effect of own responsiveness,
partner’s responsiveness, or informant’s perceptions on perceived partner
responsiveness, nor did gender significantly moderate any of the effects of
own responsiveness or partner’s responsiveness on relationship-promotion
outcomes. Gender did significantly moderate the effect of informant’s
perceptions on support provision (b ⫽ .25, p ⬍ .05). Informant’s perceptions nonsignificantly predicted increased support provision for female
perceivers (b ⫽ .11, p ⫽ .11) and decreased support provision for male
perceivers (b ⫽ ⫺.14, p ⫽ .12). Given that this effect was not predicted
and was found in the context of many tests of gender interactions, it may
be due to chance.

LEMAY AND CLARK

666

part, because they projected their own high levels of care. In
turn, partners appeared to detect perceivers’ support provision
and self-disclosure.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

General Discussion
Most people desire to establish and maintain close, communal
bonds, and we can do a number of things to facilitate this goal. We
can provide tangible or emotional support to partners when they
need it. We can seek intimacy and responsiveness by disclosing
private aspects of ourselves and expressing our needs and vulnerabilities. We can construe our partners in a positive light to
facilitate our own attraction and conviction, and we can express
these perceptions and feelings to show partners that we value them.
We can maintain our care over time.
But before we do any of this, we need to develop conviction of
another sort. We need to know that we are not needlessly expending our energy and time, foolishly building our hopes, and dangerously feeling attached and revealing vulnerabilities to people
who will hurt us (Murray et al., 2006). In short, we need to be
confident that partners want what we want. Were it not for some
assistance, such confidence may be rather difficult, if not impossible, to come by. Rarely do people behave in ways that unequivocally reveal their communal desires; everyone is selfish and
overburdened at times, and there is no guarantee of the durability
of previously expressed sentiments. Were it not for some assistance, relationship partners might often arrive at an interdependence stalemate, neither making a move until he or she is sure of
the other’s intentions.
In this article, we have posited that the projection of responsiveness is one form of “assistance” that might resolve or bypass
this dilemma. According to our model, people tend to project their
own communal responsiveness onto partners. They egocentrically
interpret their own concern for a partner’s welfare and motivation
to attend to the partner’s needs as indicators of the partner’s
concern and communal motivation. Doing so, we predicted, resolves or bypasses an interdependence stalemate by providing
caring perceivers with the conviction they need to promote the
communal bond.

Projection of Responsiveness
All five of our studies provide evidence supporting the idea that
people egocentrically use their own felt communal responsiveness
to a relationship partner to infer the partner’s responsiveness to the
self. In Study 1, participants who recalled an incident in which
they were unresponsive to a partner claimed to be less responsive
to the partner’s needs (relative to participants who recalled an
ordinary experience). Suggesting projection of these beliefs, these
participants, in turn, claimed that the partner was less responsive to
them. In Study 2, participants who were instructed to be responsive
to new acquaintances (relative to participants who were instructed
not to be responsive) perceived the acquaintances as enacting more
responsive behaviors and as being more attracted to them, independent of acquaintances’ self-reported behavior and attraction. In
Studies 3–5, participants’ felt responsiveness to relationship partners (mostly friends in Studies 3 and 5, spouses in Study 4)
predicted perceptions of partners’ responsiveness to the self more
strongly than did partners’ self-reported responsiveness and, in
Study 5, outsiders’ reports of partners’ responsiveness. These

findings suggest that people do project their own felt communal
care and motivation.
As a whole, this research mitigates several alternative explanations. It could be argued, for instance, that partners do not accurately report on their own responsiveness and that this is why we
have found greater evidence for projection than for accuracy. This
alternative explanation is mitigated by findings from Study 1, in
which partners’ reports are not involved. If evidence for projection
was due to inaccurate partner reports, then random assignment to
conditions designed to affect own felt responsiveness should not
have had downstream effects on perceived partner responsiveness.
But it did. Moreover, we found evidence of projection in Study 2
with regard to perceptions of a new acquaintance’s responsive
behavior (a domain in which the acquaintance’s self-reports might
seem untrustworthy) and with regard to perceptions of the acquaintance’s attraction to the self (a domain that is more widely considered within the province of subjective experience). In Study 5,
we used two individuals’ reports of the target partner’s responsiveness, a method that more comprehensively controls for accuracy than does the method employed in most studies of projection
bias.
One might argue that shared-method variance explains projection effects. This argument cannot explain effects of experimental
manipulations in Studies 1 and 2 and is mitigated in Study 5, in
which perceiver variance in perceptions of partners’ responsiveness (which is necessary to form arguments about shared-method
variance) was nearly nonexistent and in which projection effects
were found when we controlled for method variance.
Of course, we are not suggesting that perceptions of partner
responsiveness completely lack accuracy. Indeed, the current research does reveal that perceptions do reflect a kernel of truth.
Even so, the question of why accuracy is not greater is an important one. The answer, we think, is that in day-to-day life, a
partner’s responsive behavior can be interpreted in many ways,
and responsiveness is not always easy to see. Many forms of
responsiveness can be subtle (e.g., making an effort to understand
a partner’s feelings and nodding, smiling when a partner succeeds
on a task) and easily missed. However, other forms of responsiveness may be entirely invisible (cf. Bolger et al., 2000), such as
refraining from giving advice when it is clear a partner wants to
figure something out him or herself or stifling an impulse to
complain. Such forms of responsiveness may never be noted.
Finally, when one’s own life is going very well, responsiveness
may reside primarily in the partner’s mind. The partner may be
very attentive and aware of one’s welfare, but he or she may
provide little outward support other than sharing in one’s joys, as
more overt forms of support are not needed. Even when acts are
visible, interpretations regarding their responsiveness can vary.
For instance, a gift carefully chosen with the partner’s preferences
in mind may mistakenly be seen as having been purchased so the
giver could use it. A gift selfishly chosen so that the giver can use
it may mistakenly be seen as responsive. Without unequivocal
behavioral manifestations and when intent is ambiguous, the imagination of a partner’s latent responsiveness may be easily guided
by one’s own feelings and motivations.

Functionally Guiding Relationship Promotion
The current research emphasized what projected responsiveness
might “do” for perceivers. In line with research on functional

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

PROJECTION OF COMMUNAL RESPONSIVENESS

interpersonal cognition (e.g., Murray, 1999; Simpson et al., 1995),
we expected that projecting responsiveness might help perceivers
in their pursuit of interpersonal goals. In particular, projecting own
responsiveness might “liberate the heart,” quelling self-protective
inhibitions so caring perceivers can pursue the desired mutual
communal relationship. Much as people see emotions in others that
facilitate pursuit of activated goals (Maner et al., 2005), seeing
one’s own communal motivation in others facilitates acting on that
motivation. Projecting responsiveness may be a process through
which those who care for partners are able to behave and think in
interpersonally salutary ways.
Looking at the results from a different perspective, another thing
that projected responsiveness or, more to the point, projected lack
of responsiveness might seem to “do” for people is to “protect the
heart.” It can seem to protect relatively nonresponsive people from
investing their own communal responsiveness into a relationship
that, from their own perspective, is not characterized by much
partner responsiveness. From a broader perspective, even projecting lack of responsiveness might facilitate mutual communal relationships. That is, uncaring perceivers’ projection dissuades
them from involvement in a relationship with a partner about
whom they do not care, freeing their resources to find partners
about whom they do care.
The current five studies support this perspective. In Study 1,
participants who were manipulated to feel unresponsive to partners
evaluated the partners more negatively than did control-condition
participants. In Study 2, participants who were manipulated to be
responsive to a new acquaintance reported greater liking for the
acquaintance, reported desiring to become closer to the acquaintance, and subsequently expressed more warmth toward the acquaintance than did participants who were instructed not to be
responsive. In both cases, their reports of responsiveness appeared
to be influenced, in part, by projection of their own responsiveness.
In Studies 3–5, relatively enduring responsiveness exhibited
indirect associations with relationship-promotion outcomes that
also were consistent with our model. In Studies 3 and 5, participants who claimed to care for partners reported that they were
willing to express feelings of hurt and sadness and reported prior
self-disclosure (responses that would facilitate both intimacy and
vulnerability; Reis & Shaver, 1988) and evaluated partners more
positively (a response that might both reflect and facilitate dependence; Murray et al., 2006) in part, our data suggest, because they
projected their care. In Study 5, participants who claimed to care
for partners also claimed to have provided more support in the
past—a response that contributes to the communal nature of the
relationship—in part, our data suggest, because they projected
their care.
The very maintenance of communal care may rest, in part, on
tendencies to project it. People may not continue to care for a
partner unless they see their care reflected back to them, and
projection may be one source of perceived mutuality. Studies 3 and
4 supported this idea. Participants who cared for partners appeared
to see their partners as caring through projection, and these projected perceptions predicted continued caring. Indeed, the temporal stability of own responsiveness was partially mediated by
perceptions of partners’ responsiveness. This suggests that, rather
than being entirely intrinsically stable, own responsiveness is
partially maintained through the confluence of two processes: a
tendency to project that responsiveness onto partners and a ten-

667

dency to regulate one’s own responsiveness in accordance with
projected perceptions.
We view these responses to projected responsiveness as functional because they increase the probability of achieving the desired mutual communal bond. Disclosing aspects of the self to a
partner may enhance the intimate nature of the relationship and
elicit responsiveness from the partner more than would refraining
from self-disclosure. Evaluating a partner positively may cause
that partner to feel positively regarded and facilitate one’s own
approach and investment. Providing support undoubtedly causes
the partner to feel supported more than does withholding support
and certainly more than does responding with behaviors that
exacerbate a partner’s distress. Desiring a close relationship may
motivate expressions of attraction more than would desiring to
maintain distance.
Of course, many of these responses might not be detected by
partners because partners are biased perceivers, too. However, the
process that we have described may maximize the probability of a
partner detecting responsiveness despite the possibility of many
misses. That is, those who project their care may glean the confidence necessary to promote the relationship and consequently emit
many signs of their own communal desires. Although many of
these signs might be missed by partners, some will be detected.
Indeed, in Study 2, projection of responsiveness appeared to motivate behavioral warmth that was evident to outside observers. In
Studies 3 and 4, projected perceptions of partner responsiveness
predicted maintenance of own responsiveness, and the partner’s
perceptions of that responsiveness contained some truth. In Study
5, the self-disclosure and support-seeking outcomes were detected
by partners. Projection-guided responses may communicate one’s
communal desires to partners, which may quell their own selfprotection concerns and provide an incentive for them to establish
the relationship that the perceiver desires (see also Wieselquist et
al., 1999).
That said, not all of the functions of projecting responsiveness
may require partner detection. Perceiving that we belong in mutually caring relationships facilitates healthy psychological functioning (Baumeister & Leary, 1995). People may benefit from a
subjectively construed safety net, the fragility of which is never
fully tested. Moreover, projected perceptions of responsiveness
may facilitate relationship satisfaction, independent of partners’
responsiveness (Lemay et al., 2007). The relationship-promotion
outcomes emphasized in the current research also may facilitate
perceivers’ well-being in the absence of partner detection. For
instance, evaluating a partner positively is thought to contribute to
one’s own relationship satisfaction, ease one’s own insecurities,
and enhance one’s self-perceived desirability as a relationship
partner (Murray et al., 1996a; Murray, Holmes, Griffin, Bellavia,
& Rose, 2001). Likewise, providing support to a partner may
benefit the provider by causing him or her to believe that he or she
is a caring person (Clark & Grote, 1998), and providing help to
partners with whom a communal relationship is expected enhances
providers’ mood (Williamson & Clark, 1989, 1992; Williamson,
Clark, Pegalis, & Behan, 1996). Thus, just by perceiving a partner
to be communally responsive, a person may feel better after
helping that person even absent any change in responsiveness on
the partner’s part. Support that a partner does not detect may also
nevertheless benefit the partner (Bolger et al., 2000) and, in turn,
the relationship.

668

LEMAY AND CLARK

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Is the Projection of Responsiveness Ever Dysfunctional?
That we have emphasized the positive functions of projecting
high levels of communal responsiveness should not imply that our
position is that it is always functional. Of course, projection of
one’s own high responsiveness and one’s own low responsiveness
sometimes can be dysfunctional.
Potential dysfunctional consequences of projecting high responsiveness. Perceivers’ projection-guided attempts to establish a
communal relationship might not be successful if partners adamantly do not want that relationship. Although perceivers’ desire
to establish a communal relationship is an incentive for partners,
other qualities of perceivers (e.g., interests, values, personality,
and attractiveness) might deter partners in some cases (Baumeister
et al., 1993). If perceivers’ and partners’ desires are substantially
discrepant and partners are not willing to budge, perceivers might
initially project, invest their time, and raise their hopes, only to
realize later that this was all in vain. Whereas initial projections of
responsiveness might be pleasant (i.e., imagining the relationship
as mutually communal likely has short-term benefits), the discovery of the partner’s true sentiments may often be devastating, and
prior projection-guided attempts to promote the relationship
may only exacerbate one’s distress (cf. Murray et al., 2006).
Along the way, a potential partner who initially felt neutral
toward a perceiver or an actual partner who initially had weak
communal ties with a perceiver might also come to feel annoyed
and actively avoid the perceiver who, projecting his or her own
responsiveness, unwisely tries to establish or strengthen a communal relationship.
Indeed, the process of unreciprocated love tells a tale of projection. In work by Baumeister et al. (1993), relative to rejecters,
would-be lovers more frequently reported that rejecters initially
reciprocated their desires for romance and that rejecters led them
on, whereas rejecters more frequently reported that they explicitly
communicated their rejection and that would-be lovers engaged in
denial and self-deception (Baumeister et al., 1993). These discrepancies may be explained by would-be lovers’ projection of their
own feelings. Rejecters also claimed that would-be lovers continued to pursue the relationship long after they should have.
Would-be lovers’ confidence in making such pursuits may have
been fueled by their projection. Finally, would-be lovers reported
having more positive and warm feelings than did rejecters, perhaps
during the phase in which they projected, but claimed that the
event damaged their self-esteem, perhaps after projection gave
way to the realization of rejection.
Similarly, projection of responsiveness may be one reason why
caring perceivers remain involved in relationships that are detrimental to their well-being. For instance, many victims of domestic
abuse construe such abuse as signs of love or attribute partners’
abuse to reasons other than a lack of communal concern (Lloyd &
Emery, 2000). In the short term, such projections may maintain a
sense of relational security and promote behaviors that might
enhance the communal nature of the relationship and hence could
be considered functional. If such abuse persists, projection of
responsiveness might hold people in a relationship that is detrimental to well-being. As both of these examples suggest, whether
projection of responsiveness is dysfunctional might depend on
whether one emphasizes short-term or long-term consequences

and whether projection-guided attempts to promote a communal
relationship effectively persuade targets.
Potential dysfunctional consequences of projecting low responsiveness. Projection of one’s own lack of responsiveness might
also sometimes be dysfunctional. Although we have emphasized
caring perceivers’ tendencies to project their own care, our findings also imply uncaring perceivers’ tendencies to project their
apathy. In terms of developing a mutual communal relationship,
projecting lack of responsiveness is probably harmful, as it undermines trust. However, this projection may be beneficial in other
ways. People often feel guilty when they do not reciprocate others’
communal responsiveness (Baumeister, Stillwell, & Heatherton,
1994; Baumeister et al., 1993). Projecting lack of responsiveness
might deflect this guilt. In this case, projection of lack of responsiveness might be functional for the individual but not for the
partner nor for the communal relationship. In addition, the success
of some relationships, such as exchange relationships or relationships characterized by weak communal responsiveness (i.e., neighbors), might depend on each partner not feeling especially responsive to the other’s needs (Reis et al., 2004). For a perceiver who
desires that sort of relationship, projecting his or her low level of
responsiveness might be functional, as it might resolve behavioral
conflict and discomfort that might arise through acknowledging
the partner’s communal desires.

When and Why Does Projection Occur?
Given the many ways in which projection of responsiveness
might be dysfunctional, one might wonder why and when this
process exists. We believe this particular bias assists people in
judging a partner’s responsiveness under conditions of uncertainty
and that conditions of uncertainty are common because expressions of responsiveness are often inconsistent, ambiguous, or invisible. However, it is important to note that when partners do
consistently and unequivocally express their level of care, projection effects may be weaker and accuracy effects may be stronger
than what we have observed. Stronger accuracy and weaker projection also may occur when perceivers are in a deliberative
mindset, one in which they are motivated to carefully weigh the
evidence rather than quickly jump to conclusions (Gagné & Lydon, 2004), as they often may be when perceivers themselves have
not yet developed a sense of their own care and desire.
We further speculate that projection effects may be robust (as
reported in this article, as well as in an earlier one; Lemay et al.,
2007) because people focus on their judgments of responsiveness and dwell on them most when they are in a deliberative
state or when a partner’s responsiveness is unexpectedly and
surprising low or high—those situations in which we have just
noted that the projection effects we have identified may be
diminished. It is in day-to-day, noncrisis, mundane interactions
with others in which, we suspect, most projection of the sort we
have observed occurs. To say that the interactions are common
and mundane, however, does not mean they are unimportant. To
the contrary, we suspect that they are very important to the
formation and strengthening (or lack thereof) of close relationships.
Beyond epistemic functions, this particular bias may be robust
because it motivates people to seek relationships with those for
whom they are confident they care or would like to care and to
avoid relationships with those for whom they are confident they do

PROJECTION OF COMMUNAL RESPONSIVENESS

not care and do not wish to care. Hence, by aligning security with
desire, this bias seems to aid in the establishment and maintenance
of mutual communal relationships.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

References
Abbey, A., Andrews, F. M., & Halman, L. J. (1995). Provision and receipt
of social support and disregard: What is their impact on the marital life
quality of infertile and fertile couples? Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 68, 455– 469.
Altman, I., & Taylor, D. A. (1973). Social penetration: The development of
interpersonal relationships. New York: Holt, Reinhart & Winston.
Baron, R. M., & Kenny, D. A. (1986). The moderator–mediator variable
distinction in social psychological research: Conceptual, strategic, and
statistical considerations. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
51, 1173–1182.
Barrera, M., Sandler, I. N., & Ramsay, T. B. (1981). Preliminary development of a scale of social support: Studies on college students. American Journal of Community Psychology, 9, 435– 447.
Barry, R. A., Lakey, B., & Orehek, E. (2007). Links among attachment
dimensions, affect, the self, and perceived support for broadly generalized attachment styles and specific bonds. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 33, 340 –353.
Baumeister, R. F., & Leary, M. R. (1995). The need to belong: Desire for
interpersonal attachments as a fundamental human motivation. Psychological Bulletin, 117, 497–529.
Baumeister, R. F., Stillwell, A. M., & Heatherton, T. F. (1994). Guilt: An
interpersonal approach. Psychological Bulletin, 115, 243–267.
Baumeister, R. F., Wotman, S. R., & Stillwell, A. M. (1993). Unrequited
love: On heartbreak, anger, guilt, scriptlessness, and humiliation. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 64, 377–394.
Bolger, N., Zuckerman, A., & Kessler, R. C. (2000). Invisible support and
adjustment to stress. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 79,
953–961.
Bruner, J. S. (1957). On perceptual readiness. Psychological Review, 64,
123–152.
Campbell, L., & Kashy, D. A. (2002). Estimating actor, partner, and
interaction effects for dyadic data using PROC MIXED and HLM: A
user-friendly guide. Personal Relationships, 9, 327–342.
Clark, M. S., Dubash, P., & Mills, J. (1998). Interest in another’s consideration of one’s needs in communal and exchange relationships. Journal
of Experimental Social Psychology, 34, 246 –264.
Clark, M. S., & Finkel, E. J. (2005). Willingness to express emotion: The
impact of relationship type, communal orientation, and their interaction.
Personal Relationships, 12, 169 –180.
Clark, M. S., Graham, S., & Grote, N. (2002). Bases for giving benefits in
marriage: What is ideal? What is realistic? What really happens? In P.
Noller & J. A. Feeney (Eds.), Understanding marriage: Developments in
the study of couple interaction (pp. 150 –176). New York: Cambridge
University Press.
Clark, M. S., & Grote, N. K. (1998). Why aren’t indices of relationship
costs always negatively related to indices of relationship quality? Personality and Social Psychology Review, 2, 2–17.
Clark, M. S., & Mills, J. (1993). The difference between communal and
exchange relationships: What it is and is not. Personality and Social
Psychology Bulletin, 19, 684 – 691.
Clark, M. S., & Monin, J. K. (2006). Giving and receiving communal
responsiveness as love. In R. J. Sternberg & K. Weis (Eds.), The new
psychology of love (pp. 200 –221). New Haven, CT: Yale University
Press.
Clark, M. S., Ouellette, R., Powell, M. C., & Milberg, S. (1987). Recipient’s mood, relationship type, and helping. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 53, 94 –103.
Cohen, J., Cohen, P., West, S. G., & Aiken, L. S. (2003). Applied multiple
regression/correlation analysis for the behavioral sciences. Mahwah,
NJ: Erlbaum.

669

Cohen, S., Sherrod, D. R., & Clark, M. S. (1986). Social skills and the
stress-protective role of social support. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 50, 963–973.
Collins, N. L., & Feeney, B. C. (2000). A safe haven: An attachment theory
perspective on support seeking and caregiving in intimate relationships.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 78, 1053–1073.
Collins, N. L., & Feeney, B. C. (2004). Working models of attachment
shape perceptions of social support: Evidence from experimental and
observational studies. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 87,
363–383.
Cook, W. L. (2000). Understanding attachment security in family context.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 78, 285–294.
Coyne, J. C., Wortman, C. B., & Lehman, D. R. (1988). The other side of
support: Emotional overinvolvement and miscarried helping. In B. H.
Gottlieb (Ed.), Marshaling social support: Formats, processes, and
effects (pp. 305–330). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Cutrona, C. E., Hessling, R. M., & Suhr, J. A. (1997). The influence of
husband and wife personality on marital social support interactions.
Personal Relationships, 4, 379 –393.
DePaulo, B. M., Kashy, D. A., Kirkendol, S. E., Wyer, M. M., & Epstein,
J. A. (1996). Lying in everyday life. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 70, 979 –995.
Epley, N., Keysar, B., Van Boven, L., & Gilovich, T. (2004). Perspective
taking as egocentric anchoring and adjustment. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 87, 327–339.
Felson, R. B. (1980). Communication barriers and the reflected appraisal
process. Social Psychology Quarterly, 43, 223–233.
Ferguson, M. J., & Bargh, J. A. (2004). Liking is for doing: The effects of
goal pursuit on automatic evaluation. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 87, 557–572.
Finkel, E. J., & Campbell, W. K. (2001). Self-control and accommodation
in close relationships: An interdependence analysis. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 81, 263–277.
Fiske, S. T. (1992). Thinking is for doing: Portraits of social cognition from
daguerreotype to laserphoto. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 63, 877– 889.
Frey, K. P., & Smith, E. R. (1993). Beyond the actor’s traits: Forming
impressions of actors, targets, and relationships from social behaviors.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 65, 486 – 493.
Fritz, M. S., & MacKinnon, D. P. (2007). Required sample size to detect
the mediated effect. Psychological Science, 18, 233–239.
Gagné, F., & Lydon, J. (2004). Bias and accuracy in close relationships: An
integrative review. Personality and Social Psychology Review, 8, 322–
338.
Gangestad, S. W., Simpson, J. A., DiGeronimo, K., & Biek, M. (1992).
Differential accuracy in person perception across traits: Examination of
a functional hypothesis. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
62, 688 – 698.
Gill, M. J., & Swann, W. B., Jr. (2004). On what it means to know
someone: A matter of pragmatics. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 86, 405– 418.
Griffin, D. W., & Gonzalez, R. (1995). Correlational analysis of dyad-level
data in the exchangeable case. Psychological Bulletin, 118, 430 – 439.
Holmes, D. S. (1968). Dimensions of projection. Psychological Bulletin,
69, 248 –268.
Holmes, J. G., & Rempel, J. K. (1989). Trust in close relationships. In C.
Hendrick (Ed.), Close relationships (pp. 187–220). Thousand Oaks, CA:
Sage.
James, W. (1890). The principles of psychology. New York: Dover.
Kashy, D. A., & Kenny, D. A. (2000). The analysis of data from dyads and
groups. In H. T. Reis & C. M. Judd (Eds.), Handbook of research
methods in social and personality psychology (pp. 451– 477). New York:
Cambridge University Press.
Kawada, C. L. K., Oettingen, G., Gollwitzer, P. M., & Bargh, J. A. (2004).

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

670

LEMAY AND CLARK

The projection of implicit and explicit goals. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 86, 545–559.
Kenny, D. A. (1994). Interpersonal perception: A social relations analysis.
New York: Guilford Press.
Kenny, D. A. (2006). Estimation of the SRM not using specialized software. Retrieved February 19, 2008, from http://davidakenny.net/doc/
srmsoftware.doc
Kenny, D. A., & Acitelli, L. K. (2001). Accuracy and bias in the perception
of the partner in a close relationship. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 80, 439 – 448.
Kenny, D. A., Bond, C. F., Jr., Mohr, C. D., & Horn, E. M. (1996). Do we
know how much people like one another? Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 71, 928 –936.
Kenny, D. A., Kashy, D. A., & Cook, W. L. (2006). Dyadic data analysis.
New York: Guilford Press.
Krueger, J., & Clement, R. W. (1994). The truly false consensus effect: An
ineradicable and egocentric bias in social perception. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 67, 596 – 610.
Kunda, Z. (1990). The case for motivated reasoning. Psychological Bulletin, 108, 480 – 498.
Lakey, B., & Cassady, P. B. (1990). Cognitive processes in perceived
social support. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 59, 337–
343.
Lakey, B., McCabe, K. M., Fisicaro, S. A., & Drew, J. B. (1996). Environmental and personal determinants of support perceptions: Three
generalizability studies. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
70, 1270 –1280.
Laurenceau, J.-P., Barrett, L. F., & Pietromonaco, P. R. (1998). Intimacy as
an interpersonal process: The importance of self-disclosure, partner
disclosure, and perceived partner responsiveness in interpersonal exchanges. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 74, 1238 –1251.
Leary, M. R., Springer, C., Negel, L., Ansell, E., & Evans, K. (1998). The
causes, phenomenology, and consequences of hurt feelings. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 74, 1225–1237.
Lemay, E. P., Jr., Clark, M. S., & Feeney, B. C. (2007). Projection of
responsiveness to needs and the construction of satisfying communal
relationships. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 92, 834 –
853.
Lloyd, S. A., & Emery, B. C. (2000). The context and dynamics of intimate
aggression against women. Journal of Social and Personal Relationships, 17, 503–521.
Lydon, J. E., Jamieson, D. W., & Holmes, J. G. (1997). The meaning of
social interactions in the transition from acquaintanceship to friendship.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 73, 536 –548.
MacKinnon, D. P., Krull, J. L., & Lockwood, C. M. (2000). Equivalence
of the mediation, confounding and suppression effect. Prevention Science, 1, 173–181.
MacKinnon, D. P., Lockwood, C. M., Hoffman, J. M., West, S. G., &
Sheets, V. (2002). A comparison of methods to test mediation and other
intervening variable effects. Psychological Methods, 7, 83–104.
Maner, J. K., Kenrick, D. T., Becker, D. V., Robertson, T. E., Hofer, B.,
Neuberg, S. L., et al. (2005). Functional projection: How fundamental
social motives can bias interpersonal perception. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 88, 63–78.
Mikulincer, M., & Nachshon, O. (1991). Attachment styles and patterns of
self-disclosure. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 61, 321–
331.
Miller, L. C., Berg, J. H., & Archer, R. L. (1983). Openers: Individuals
who elicit intimate self-disclosure. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 44, 1234 –1244.
Mills, J., Clark, M. S., Ford, T. E., & Johnson, M. (2004). Measurement of
communal strength. Personal Relationships, 11, 213–230.
Murray, S. L. (1999). The quest for conviction: Motivated cognition in
romantic relationships. Psychological Inquiry, 10, 23–34.
Murray, S. L., Holmes, J. G., Bellavia, G., Griffin, D. W., & Dolderman,

D. (2002). Kindred spirits? The benefits of egocentrism in close relationships. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 82, 563–581.
Murray, S. L., Holmes, J. G., & Collins, N. L. (2006). Optimizing assurance: The risk regulation system in relationships. Psychological Bulletin,
132, 641– 666.
Murray, S. L., Holmes, J. G., Dolderman, D., & Griffin, D. W. (2000).
What the motivated mind sees: Comparing friends’ perspectives to
married partners’ views of each other. Journal of Experimental Social
Psychology, 36, 600 – 620.
Murray, S. L., Holmes, J. G., & Griffin, D. W. (1996a). The benefits of
positive illusions: Idealization and the construction of satisfaction in
close relationships. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 70,
79 –98.
Murray, S. L., Holmes, J. G., & Griffin, D. W. (1996b). The self-fulfilling
nature of positive illusions in romantic relationships: Love is not blind,
but prescient. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 71, 1155–
1180.
Murray, S. L., Holmes, J. G., & Griffin, D. W. (2000). Self-esteem and the
quest for felt security: How perceived regard regulates attachment processes. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 78, 478 – 498.
Murray, S. L., Holmes, J. G., Griffin, D. W., Bellavia, G., & Rose, P.
(2001). The mismeasure of love: How self-doubt contaminates relationship beliefs. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 27, 423– 436.
Reis, H. T., Clark, M. S., & Holmes, J. G. (2004). Perceived partner
responsiveness as an organizing construct in the study of intimacy and
closeness. In D. J. Mashek & A. P. Aron (Eds.), Handbook of closeness
and intimacy (pp. 201–225). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Reis, H. T., & Shaver, P. (1988). Intimacy as an interpersonal process. In
S. Duck, D. F. Hay, S. E. Hobfoll, & W. Ickes (Eds.), Handbook of
personal relationships: Theory, research and interventions (pp. 367–
389). Oxford, England: Wiley.
Roskos-Ewoldsen, D. R., & Fazio, R. H. (1992). On the orienting value of
attitudes: Attitude accessibility as a determinant of an object’s attraction
of visual attention. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 63,
198 –211.
Shrout, P. E., & Bolger, N. (2002). Mediation in experimental and nonexperimental studies: New procedures and recommendations. Psychological Methods, 7, 422– 445.
Simpson, J. A., Ickes, W., & Blackstone, T. (1995). When the head protects
the heart: Empathic accuracy in dating relationships. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 69, 629 – 641.
Simpson, J. A., Orina, M. M., & Ickes, W. (2003). When accuracy hurts,
and when it helps: A test of the empathic accuracy model in marital
interactions. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 85, 881–
893.
Simpson, J. A., Rholes, W. S., & Nelligan, J. S. (1992). Support seeking
and support giving within couples in an anxiety-provoking situation: The
role of attachment styles. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
62, 434 – 446.
Smith, C. A., & Ellsworth, P. C. (1985). Patterns of cognitive appraisal in
emotion. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 48, 813– 838.
Snijders, T. A. B., & Kenny, D. A. (1999). The social relations model for
family data: A multilevel approach. Personal Relationships, 6, 471– 486.
Tazelaar, M. J. A., Van Lange, P. A. M., & Ouwerkerk, J. W. (2004). How
to cope with “noise” in social dilemmas: The benefits of communication.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 87, 845– 859.
Tooby, J., & Cosmides, L. (1996). Friendship and the banker’s paradox:
Other pathways to the evolution of adaptations for altruism. In W. G.
Runciman, J. M. Smith, & R. I. M. Dunbar (Eds.), Evolution of social
behaviour patterns in primates and man (pp. 119 –143). Oxford, England: Oxford University Press.
Van Lange, P. A. M., Rusbult, C. E., Drigotas, S. M., Arriaga, X. B.,
Witcher, B. S., & Cox, C. L. (1997). Willingness to sacrifice in close
relationships. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 72, 1373–
1395.

PROJECTION OF COMMUNAL RESPONSIVENESS

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Vinokur, A., Schul, Y., & Caplan, R. D. (1987). Determinants of perceived
social support: Interpersonal transactions, personal outlook, and transient affective states. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 53,
1137–1145.
Wieselquist, J., Rusbult, C. E., Foster, C. A., & Agnew, C. R. (1999).
Commitment, pro-relationship behavior, and trust in close relationships.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 77, 942–966.
Williamson, G. M., & Clark, M. S. (1989). Providing help and desired
relationship type as determinants of changes in moods and selfevaluations. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 56, 722–734.
Williamson, G. M., & Clark, M. S. (1992). Impact of desired relationship
type on affective reactions to choosing and being required to help.
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 18, 10 –18.
Williamson, G. M., Clark, M. S., Pegalis, L. J., & Behan, A. (1996).

671

Affective consequences of refusing to help in communal and exchange
relationships. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 22, 34 – 47.
Wrosch, C., Scheier, M. F., Miller, G. E., Schulz, R., & Carver, C. S.
(2003). Adaptive self-regulation of unattainable goals: Goal disengagement, goal reengagement, and subjective well-being. Personality and
Social Psychology Bulletin, 29, 1494 –1508.
Yovetich, N. A., & Rusbult, C. E. (1994). Accommodative behavior in
close relationships: Exploring transformation of motivation. Journal of
Experimental Social Psychology, 30, 138 –164.

Received August 6, 2006
Revision received August 23, 2007
Accepted August 28, 2007 䡲

