Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition
2008, Vol. 34, No. 1, 97–111

Copyright 2008 by the American Psychological Association
0278-7393/08/$12.00 DOI: 10.1037/0278-7393.34.1.97

A Single-System Account of the Relationship Between Priming,
Recognition, and Fluency
Christopher J. Berry and David R. Shanks

Richard N. A. Henson

University College London

Medical Research Council (MRC)
Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit

A single-system computational model of priming and recognition was applied to studies that have looked
at the relationship between priming, recognition, and fluency in continuous identification paradigms. The
model was applied to 3 findings that have been interpreted as evidence for a multiple-systems account:
(a) priming can occur for items not recognized; (b) the pattern of identification reaction times (RTs) to
hits, misses, correct rejections, and false alarms can change as a function of recognition performance; and
(c) fluency effects (shorter RTs to words judged old vs. judged new) and priming effects (shorter RTs
to old vs. new words) can be observed in amnesic patients at levels comparable with healthy adults
despite impaired or near-chance recognition. The authors’ simulations suggest, contrary to previous
interpretations, that these results are consistent with a single-system account.
Keywords: fluency, repetition priming, recognition, computational model

reported in normal adults (see Roediger & McDermott, 1993, for
a review); for example, semantic versus nonsemantic processing of
stimuli at study has large benefits on recognition performance but
little or no effect on priming (e.g., Jacoby & Dallas, 1981), and
changes in perceptual form between study and test can have
opposite effects on priming and recognition performance (Wagner,
Gabrieli, & Verfaellie, 1997). Dissociations, such as these, have
been interpreted as evidence for distinct memorial bases of priming and recognition (e.g., Wagner & Gabrieli, 1998; Wagner et al.,
1997).
An alternative view is that priming and recognition are, to some
extent, mediated by a common memory representation. For example, the double dissociation shown by amnesic patients and occipital lobe patients has been reproduced by the simple recurrent
network (SRN), a connectionist model in which a single memory
representation mediates priming and recognition (Kinder &
Shanks, 2001, 2003). Other simulation studies have shown that
certain types of dissociations are consistent with a single-system
perspective (see, e.g., Berry, Henson, & Shanks, 2006; Shanks,
Wilkinson, & Channon, 2003; Zaki, Nosofsky, Jessup, & Unverzagt, 2003). Similarly, and contrary to the aforementioned imaging
studies, some studies have found evidence in support of the notion
that priming and recognition depend on a common representation.
For example, Turk-Browne, Yi, and Chun (2006) found commonalities in the neural correlates of the encoding processes leading to
priming and recognition memory.
Certain dual process theories of recognition also posit a common memory source in priming and recognition. One view is that
the facilitation in processing, or fluency, from priming can give
rise to a feeling of familiarity that can serve as a basis for
recognition (Jacoby & Dallas, 1981; Mandler, 1980; Yonelinas,
Regehr, & Jacoby, 1995; for a review of studies concerned with
attributions of fluency, see Kelley & Rhodes, 2002). It has been
shown that recognition judgments can be influenced by manipulations designed to enhance fluency or speed of processing, suggesting that fluency can indeed serve as a basis for recognition. For

The question of whether repetition priming and recognition are
mediated by independent or related memory processes has received much attention and has played a key role in the development of theories of the organization of memory. Repetition priming is the term used to refer to a change in identification, detection,
or production of an item (e.g., a word) as a result of prior exposure
to the same or a similar item, whereas recognition memory typically refers to the capacity to judge whether an item has been
previously presented in a particular context.
An influential view is that priming and recognition are mediated
by functionally and neurally distinct memory systems (e.g., Gabrieli, 1998; Schacter & Tulving, 1994; Squire, 1994, 2004). Findings from patients provide compelling evidence in favor of this
view: Priming is relatively intact in amnesic patients despite severely impaired, and sometimes chance, recognition performance
(Hamann & Squire, 1997). Furthermore, individuals with damage
to right occipital brain regions show impaired priming and spared
recognition (e.g., patient M. S.; Gabrieli, Fleischman, Keane,
Reminger, & Morrell, 1995), constituting a double dissociation.
Findings from imaging studies also converge on this notion: In a
recent example, Schott et al. (2005; see also Schott et al., 2006)
found that priming and recognition were associated with distinct
patterns of functional magnetic resonance imaging activation.
Functional dissociations in behavioral performance have also been

Christopher J. Berry and David R. Shanks, Department of Psychology,
University College London, London, England; Richard N. A. Henson,
Medical Research Council (MRC) Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit,
Cambridge, England.
We thank Maarten Speekenbrink for helpful discussion, and we also
thank Jason Arndt and Andrew Heathcote for thoughtful comments on a
draft of this article.
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Christopher J. Berry, Department of Psychology, University College London,
Gower Street, London WC1E 6BT, United Kingdom. E-mail:
christopher.berry@ucl.ac.uk
97

98

BERRY, SHANKS, AND HENSON

example, Whittlesea, Jacoby, and Girard (1990) showed that an
item presented in a low masking condition at test was more likely
to be judged old than an item presented in a high masking condition. Presumably items presented in low levels of masking were
easier to read and were processed more fluently than those presented in high masking. Whittlesea et al. argued that this enhanced
fluency was misattributed to prior exposure of the word.
Studies that look at the contribution of fluency, or priming, to
recognition often use gradual clarification procedures to present
each item (e.g., by presenting a stimulus for successively longer
durations, Stark & McClelland, 2000; or by slowly unmasking a
stimulus, Conroy, Hopkins, & Squire, 2005; see also Johnston,
Dark, & Jacoby, 1985; Johnston, Hawley, & Elliot, 1991; Verfaellie & Cermak, 1999). Typically, the participant’s task is to identify
each item and then to make a recognition judgment to the item.
Repetition priming is reflected in faster identification reaction
times (RTs) to old than new items. The fluency effect is the term
usually used to describe the shorter RTs to items judged old than
items judged new, independent of actual old–new status (Conroy et
al., 2005; Johnston et al., 1985). Thus, the task permits concurrent
assessment of recognition, priming, and fluency, providing a measure of each for every item. Indeed, RTs can be compared across
all four possible outcomes—that is, hits (old items judged old),
misses (old items judged new), false alarms (new items judged
old), and correct rejections (new items judged new).
Three findings from this paradigm have been interpreted as
evidence for distinct memorial bases of priming and recognition.
Briefly, they are that (a) priming can occur for items not overtly
recognized (Stark & McClelland, 2000), (b) RTs to false alarms
are faster than RTs to misses when recognition is poor, and vice
versa when recognition is relatively good (Johnston et al., 1985),
and (c) amnesic patients show relatively intact fluency and priming
effects despite impaired recognition performance (Conroy et al.,
2005; Verfaellie & Cermak 1999).
In this article, we aim to consider each of these findings in turn
and to account for each one using a computational model in which
priming and recognition performance depend on a single source of
memorial evidence but are subject to independent sources of noise.
We present for the first time a formal quantitative model of
priming, recognition, and fluency. It is our hope that this model
may serve as a useful benchmark for evaluating multiple- versus
single-system theories and, via its testable predictions, may present
a falsification challenge to researchers. We regard it as important
that before a multiple-systems approach is advanced, researchers
can show that a single-system model is unable to account for their
data patterns or has critical limitations.

A Single-System Model of Priming and Recognition
The model presented here is conceptually very similar to standard signal detection models of recognition judgments and their
latencies (Pike, 1973; Ratcliff & Murdock, 1976; Stretch &
Wixted, 1998), and it extends previous work with this type of
model (Berry, Henson, & Shanks, 2006; Shanks et al., 2003). It
should be noted from the outset that the model is one simply of the
influence of memory on performance in priming and recognition
tasks rather than a detailed mechanistic account of the processes
involved in these tasks. The model starts with the assumption that,
at test, both old and new items are associated with a memory

variable called familiarity f. f is a normally distributed random
variable:
f ⬃ N共␮, ␴f兲,

(1)

which, because of prior exposure, is assumed to have a greater mean
value for old items (␮old) than for new items (␮new). For a given item,
the same value of f contributes to both recognition and priming tasks
(which is what makes it a single-system model). The judgment made
during a recognition task depends on the variable Jr:
Jr ⫽ f ⫹ er

(2)

e r ⬃ N共0, ␴r兲,
where er is another normally distributed random variable with a
mean of zero and a standard deviation of ␴r that represents taskspecific sources of noise in the recognition task.
Similar to signal detection theory of recognition (see, e.g.,
Macmillan & Creelman, 2005), accuracy is simulated in the recognition task by comparing the value of Jr against a criterion value
(C). If the value of Jr for a given item exceeds the criterion, then
the item will be judged “old,” otherwise it will be judged “new.”
In principle C is free to vary; however, for the sake of simplicity,
C is set here to the midpoint between the means of the old and new
familiarity distributions, that is, (␮new ⫹ ␮old)/2.
To simulate an identification RT for the clarification task, we
assume that RT is a decreasing function of f but with the addition
of another independent source of noise:
RT ⫽ b ⫺ sf ⫹ ep

(3)

e p ⬃ N共0, ␴p兲,
where the parameters b and s are merely scaling parameters that
represent the RT intercept and slope (rate of change of RT with f),
respectively. The noise associated with the priming task, ep, represents measurement error, or the influence of nonmemorial factors on performance in priming tasks (Ostergaard, 1992). This
method of simulating the influence of memory on RTs is similar to
previous applications of the model (Shanks & Perruchet, 2002;
Shanks et al., 2003; although other linear transformations of f can
be used to simulate performance in other tasks, e.g., perceptual
identification accuracy—see Berry, Henson, & Shanks, 2006).
Thus, greater values of f lead to a greater likelihood of an old
response and shorter RTs. In sum, the central assumption in the
model is that a single familiarity signal drives priming and recognition tasks but is scaled differently and is subjected to different
sources of noise for each task.
We now turn to the data from Stark and McClelland (2000),
which was taken as evidence for multiple bases of recognition and
priming. Stark and McClelland used the continuous identification
with recognition (CID-R) task (Feustel, Shiffrin, & Salasoo, 1983)
to investigate the relationship between priming and recognition.
On a study trial of this task, an item is presented for a brief
duration (e.g., 17 ms) and is then followed by a mask (####) for
the remainder of a presentation block (e.g., 233 ms). The item is
then re-presented, at a slightly longer duration (e.g., 34 ms), and is
again replaced with the mask for the remainder of the presentation
block (e.g., 216 ms). Presentation continues in this way, with the
item being presented for longer and longer durations until it is
identified (or until the presentation duration of the word equals the

PRIMING, RECOGNITION, AND FLUENCY

duration of a presentation block). The same procedure is used in a
second test phase (in which some items are repeated from the study
phase), except that participants make a recognition judgment following each identification.
Of key interest for these simulations is Stark and McClelland’s
(2000) observation that the identification RTs for misses (old items
judged new) were faster than those for correct rejections (new
items judged new). In other words, even though certain items were
not remembered, a priming effect still occurred for these items.
Stark and McClelland argued that this result supports the notion
that the sources of recognition memory and priming are independent, because if priming and recognition depend on the same
memory source, then priming should not occur when recognition is
absent. Furthermore, they found that performance in the two tasks
was not significantly correlated, bolstering the case for independence.

Experiment 1
The aim of Experiment 1 was to replicate Stark and McClelland’s (2000) finding of priming for items judged new and then
apply the model to the data. An experimental replication was
conducted rather than simply fitting the model to Stark and McClelland’s data because robust demonstrations of priming in the
absence of awareness remain elusive, and independent replications
of such effects are therefore important.1 We presented words at
study using the CID procedure; participants pressed a button when
they could identify the word and then named the word aloud. At
test, we presented old and new words to participants using the
CID-R procedure.

Method
Participants. Twenty-four individuals were recruited through
a University College London participant database. Their ages
ranged from 19 to 38 years, with a mean of 23.3 years. All
participants reported normal or corrected-to-normal vision, reported English as their first language, were tested individually in
sound-dampened cubicles, and were paid £4 (approximately $7) in
return for taking part. The experiment was fully automated, and the
experimenter was not present in the room during the course of the
experiment.
Materials. A total of 120 words were selected with similar
constraints to Stark and McClelland (2000): All words had four
letters, had a frequency of occurrence of 10 –200 per million
(Kucera & Francis, 1967), and had a maximum score of 500 on the
Imagability and Concreteness scales in the Medical Research
Council Psycholinguistic database (Coltheart, 1981). All words
were presented in white 20-pt Courier font. Two 50-word lists
were constructed. Each word list acted as the old or new stimuli,
counterbalanced across participants.
Procedure. At study, a single word was presented on each
CID trial. At the start of each trial, a mask (a row of hash marks
####) was presented for 500 ms to orient the participant. Next, a
word was presented in lowercase 20-pt Courier font for 17 ms. The
mask was then presented in 26-pt Courier font for 233 ms, forming
a 250-ms presentation block. The word was then immediately
presented again, but this time the exposure duration was increased
by 17 ms, and the mask followed for the remainder of the 250-ms
presentation block. Presentation continued in this way, with the

99

total stimulus plus mask time remaining constant in each block,
until the mask duration was 0 ms (15 blocks). When a response
was made (by clicking the left mouse button), the mask was
immediately presented for 2,000 ms. Participants then clicked a
button that was presented below the stimulus presentation area to
advance to the next trial.
There were 70 study trials in total. The first and last 10 trials
were considered primacy and recency filler trials, and none of the
words from these trials appeared at test. The RTs from these filler
trials were not included in any subsequent analysis. The remaining
50 trials contained the stimuli that would later appear at test. For
the study phase, participants were told that a word would flash on
the screen for longer and longer durations and that this would
make it appear clearer over time. They were told that they must
click the left mouse button when they knew the identity of the
word and then read it aloud. On each trial, the time from the onset
of the stimuli to the onset of the button press was recorded. The
importance of speed was emphasized; however, errors were discouraged: Participants were told that they should click the mouse
button only when they were confident that they could identify the
word correctly. If the word had not been identified by the end of
the trial, then a message appeared to the participants asking them
to try to be faster on the next trial. RTs longer than 3,750 ms (the
time that had elapsed by the end of the last stimulus presentation
block) were not recorded. No indication of the upcoming recognition test was given.
After the study phase, the instructions for the test phase were
presented. We presented a single word using the CID procedure on
each test trial. Participants were again instructed to press the
mouse button when they could identify the word and then read the
word aloud; they were additionally told that after identifying each
word they would have to make a judgment about the word. After
each identification, the probe “old or new?” appeared on the
screen, and two buttons labeled “old” and “new” were also presented on the screen below this probe. Participants were instructed
to click the button labeled “old” if they thought that the word they
had just identified was one from the study phase. They were told
to click the “new” button if they thought that the word had not
been presented in the study phase. There were 100 test trials in
total (50 old and 50 new trials). The selection of a word for each
trial was randomly determined. Misidentification trials at study or
test were excluded from all subsequent analysis. Responses were
recorded on a tape recorder and later checked for accuracy.
An alpha level of .05 was used for statistical tests, and t tests
were two-tailed. We used the Greenhouse–Geisser correction to
correct for nonsphericity on tests involving repeated measures
factors with more than two levels.

Results
Study phase. The number of errors made was very low (M ⬍
1% errors across participants), and as a result, no further analysis
of the errors was conducted. The mean RT to the study words was
1,441 ms (SEM ⫽ 41 ms).
1

Stark and McClelland’s (2000) other main results of (a) repetition
priming for nonwords and (b) differences in the magnitude of priming for
words, nonwords, and pseudowords were not of interest for present purposes because they were not used to argue for independent memorial bases
of priming and recognition.

100

BERRY, SHANKS, AND HENSON

Figure 1. Left panel: hit and false alarm rates for the recognition task in Experiment 1. Right panel: Continuous
identification with recognition (CID-R) reaction times (in milliseconds). In the CID-R task, a word flashed on
the screen for longer and longer durations, each time followed by a mask. Reaction times are the time from the
onset of the presentation to the time taken to press a button to indicate that the participant knew what the item
was (for correct trials only). After identification, an old–new recognition judgment was made. Gray bars indicate
data; error bars indicate 95% confidence intervals of the data. Circles indicate model results. Each simulated data
point is based on 50 observations for each old–new stimulus type and for 10,000 participants. Hit ⫽ an old word
judged old; false alarm ⫽ a new word judged old; miss ⫽ an old word judged new; correct rejection ⫽ a new
word judged new.

Test phase. Recognition accuracy, as measured by d⬘, was
significantly greater than chance overall, t(23) ⫽ 18.38, p ⬍ .001
(mean d⬘ ⫽ 1.53, SEM ⫽ 0.08; mean hit rate ⫽ 0.77, SEM ⫽ 0.02;
mean false alarm rate ⫽ 0.23, SEM ⫽ 0.02).
For every participant, priming was calculated as the mean RT
for new items minus the mean RT for old items. Priming was
significantly greater than zero overall, t(23) ⫽ 5.70, p ⬍ .001
(M ⫽ 85 ms, SEM ⫽ 15), indicating that old items were identified
more quickly at test than new items (new items M ⫽ 1,397 ms,
SEM ⫽ 46; old items M ⫽ 1,312 ms, SEM ⫽ 40). Consistent with
Stark and McClelland (2000), no significant correlation was found
between this priming effect and recognition accuracy (d⬘), r(23) ⫽
⫺.25, p ⫽ .24. As has been observed in previous studies, a
significant fluency effect was also obtained (judged old mean
RT ⫽ 1,315 ms vs. judged new mean RT ⫽ 1,392 ms), t(23) ⫽
7.77, p ⬍ .001, SEM ⫽ 10.
The RTs to correct rejections, misses, false alarms, and hits
are shown in Figure 1. A repeated measures analysis of variance, comparing the RTs for these recognition outcomes, revealed a significant difference between the RTs in these four
categories, F(3, 69) ⫽ 11.25, p ⬍ .001. Of primary interest for
this experiment, RTs to misses were significantly faster than
RTs to correct rejections, t(23) ⫽ 3.55, p ⫽ .002 (mean priming
for items judged new ⫽ 63 ms, SEM ⫽ 18), replicating Stark
and McClelland (2000). Furthermore, additional comparisons (t
tests, Bonferroni corrected) revealed that the RTs to hits were
faster than those to correct rejections, t(23) ⫽ 7.34, p ⬍ .05, and
false alarms, t(23) ⫽ 2.97, p ⬍ .05. No other significant
comparisons were found.
In summary, the key result from this experiment was that a
priming effect for items judged new was obtained, replicating
Stark and McClelland (2000). Repetition priming and recognition
were also found to be at levels significantly greater than that
expected by chance and not significantly correlated.

Simulation Study 1
For the simulation of Experiment 1, as in a prior application of
the model (Berry, Henson, & Shanks, 2006), the model was
simplified by setting ␮new ⫽ 0, and ␮old ⫽ ␮, with no loss of
generality (i.e., ␮ represents the difference in the means of the old
and new distributions). The other parameters of the model (see
Equations 1–3) are the standard deviation of the distribution of
familiarity values across items, ␴f, the standard deviation of the
noise associated with the recognition task, ␴r, the standard deviation of the noise associated with identification, ␴p, the RT intercept, b, and the familiarity slope, s, associated with the generation
of the RTs.
There were some a priori constraints imposed on the parameter
values to be consistent with previous applications of the model to
normal adults (Berry, Henson, & Shanks, 2006), namely that ␴r ⫽
␴f ⫽ 0.2.2,3 Also, the criterion, C, for both recognition and priming
judgments was fixed as the midpoint of the old and new distribu2
Models of recognition memory often allow the variance of the old item
“strength” distribution to be larger than that of the new distribution, but
here we make a simpler assumption of equal variances. In our model, the
standard deviation of recognition strength, ␴Jr, depends on ␴f and ␴r . The
simulations were repeated with ␴Jr(new) ⫽ 0.8 ⫻ ␴Jr(old) for all nonamnesic conditions by lowering ␴f(new) to 0.10583. It was not possible to
lower ␴f(new) to the point where ␴Jr(new) ⫽ 0.8 ⫻ ␴Jr(old) for the
hippocampal lesions and medial temporal lobe lesions groups (in Simulation Study 3), because even when ␴f(new) ⫽ 0, ␴Jr(new) ⬎ 0.8 ⫻ ␴Jr(old),
therefore, these simulations were repeated with ␴Jr(new) ⫽ 0.9 ⫻ ␴Jr(old),
and ␴Jr(new) ⫽ 0.95 ⫻ ␴Jr(old), respectively, by setting ␴f(new) ⫽
0.188266 (hippocampal lesions group), and ␴f(new) ⫽ 0.355422 (medial
temporal lobe lesions group). The critical predictions of the model were not
qualitatively affected by these changes.
3
The value of ␴f can be set arbitrarily (to a nonzero value) and the other
parameters rescaled accordingly. In terms of signal detection theory, the
standard would have been to set ␴Jr ⫽ 1, and hence ␴r ⫽ ␴f ⫽ 1/公2.

PRIMING, RECOGNITION, AND FLUENCY

101

Table 1
Parameters of the Model
Value
Johnston et al.
(1985)
Exp. 1

Exp. 1

Exp. 2

Conroy et al. (2005)
Exp. 2 CON

Exp. 2 MTL

Exp. 1 CON

Exp. 1 MTL

Figure 1

␴f

Standard deviation of
familiarity distributions
(new/old)
Standard deviation of
recognition noise
Standard deviation of
priming noise
Mean familiarity of
old items
RT intercept
RT–familiarity slope

0.20

0.20

0.20

0.20

0.32

0.70

0.20

0.32

0.70

0.20

0.20

0.20

0.20

0.50

1.80

0.20

0.50

1.80

290

290

290

1,000

1,000

1,000

1,000

1,000

1,000

0.42

0.54

0.12

0.37

0.37

0.37

0

0

0

1,400
210

4,150
550

4,950
550

8,770
1,450

7,650
1,450

9,500
1,450

8,770
1,450

7,650
1,450

9,500
1,450

␴p
␮
b
s

Figures 3–4

Exp. 1 H

Meaning

␴r

Figure 2

Exp. 2 H

Symbol

Figure 5

Note. Bold font indicates that the parameter was varied to fit the data. Exp. ⫽ Experiment; CON ⫽ control group; H ⫽ hippocampal lesions group;
MTL ⫽ medial temporal lobe lesions group; RT ⫽ reaction time (in milliseconds).

tions of familiarity (i.e., C ⫽ ␮/2). This left four free parameters:
␮, ␴p, s, and b. There were eight degrees of freedom in the data
(RT to hits, misses, false alarms, and correct rejections; the hit and
false alarm rates for the recognition task; the mean item RT
variance; and the Pearson correlation between priming and recognition).4 The values of the parameters (in this and subsequent
simulations) are shown in Table 1. They were chosen by a handsearch process: First ␮ was varied to fit the recognition data, next
the free parameters relating to the priming task (in Equation 3)
were varied to fit the RT data.
For each old and new item, a single value of f was randomly
sampled on each trial from the relevant distribution. The value of
f was then scaled and combined with one source of noise (Equation
3) to derive an RT that formed the basis of the fluency and priming
data. The same value of f was then combined with another source
of noise (Equation 2) to determine the recognition response. We
emphasize that the same memory signal (familiarity) contributed
to priming, recognition, and fluency.
We simulated the data using the same number of trials as in
Experiment 1 (50 old, 50 new trials) and using 10,000 simulated
participants. The large number of participants means that the error
bars on the simulation results are negligible. The simulation results
for the RTs to hits, misses, false alarms, and correct rejections are
shown in the right panel of Figure 1, and for recognition performance in the left panel of Figure 1. The error bars on the experimental data are 95% confidence intervals. It can be seen from
Figure 1 that the model results are within these intervals for all
cases.5
To determine whether the variability in RTs predicted by the
model is realistic, we calculated the variance of each participant’s
RTs to items at test. This variance was fit by the model: Mean item
standard deviation of RTs (within-subject) in Experiment 1 ⫽ 277
ms, 95% ⫹ CI ⫽ 302 ms, 95% ⫺ CI ⫽ 252 ms; mean item
standard deviation of RTs (within-subject) predicted by the
model ⫽ 296 ms. The primary reason for fitting this variance was
to ensure that RTs were generated within the appropriate intervals
and to constrain the ␴p free parameter.

Lastly, the model predicts a near zero correlation between
priming and recognition, r ⫽ .07, which is also within the 95%
confidence interval of the correlation observed in Experiment 1
(r ⫽ ⫺.25, 95% ⫹ CI ⫽ .17, 95% ⫺ CI ⫽ ⫺.68).

Discussion
The single-system model predicted that priming would occur for
items judged “new,” suggesting that this result is not necessarily
indicative of independent memorial bases of priming and recognition. In fact, the prediction of RT(misses) ⬍ RT(correct rejections) falls quite naturally out of the model, which assumes a
signal-detection-like process in recognition: Because an old item’s
value of Jr must exceed C for an old judgment to occur (see
Equation 2), values of f will tend to be greater for misses than
correct rejections. RTs for misses will tend to be faster than correct
4

Correlations were simulated in a previous application of the model by
drawing a value of ␮ randomly from a normal distribution for each
participant, i:
␮i ⬃ N共␮, ␴␮兲,

(4)

where ␴␮ is the standard deviation of the mean familiarity across participants and is a free parameter (Berry, Henson, & Shanks, 2006). ␴␮ was not
included in this simulation study to improve the ratio of free parameters to
degrees of freedom in the data, and, moreover, only one correlation is being
simulated here rather than several (as was the case in Berry, Henson, &
Shanks, 2006). It should be noted that when the simulation was repeated
with ␮i included (and ␴␮ was set at 0.028 as in Berry, Henson, & Shanks,
2006), the predicted correlation was very similar to the one obtained in this
simulation and was still within the 95% confidence interval (r ⫽ .10 with
␮i included vs. r ⫽ .07 without).
5
Because the parameter values were chosen by hand (for this simulation
study and the subsequent ones), it is likely that better fits could have been
obtained by using a more formal fitting procedure. However, our main goal
in these simulations was to show that the model can produce sufficiently
close qualitative and quantitative fits to the data.

102

BERRY, SHANKS, AND HENSON

rejections simply because RTs are a decreasing function of f (see
Equation 3). In fact, the model would even predict this qualitative
pattern if no task-specific sources of noise were included (i.e., er ⫽
ep ⫽ 0 in Equations 2 and 3). Without these sources of noise
f(hits) ⬎ f(false alarms) ⬎ f(misses) ⬎ f(correct rejections) (as
predicted by signal detection theory) and RTs will inversely correspond to f such that RT(correct rejections) ⬎ RT(misses) ⬎
RT(false alarms) ⬎ RT(hits).
Yet in the simulation of Experiment 1, the inclusion of the noise
parameters results in the pattern of RTs being RT(correct rejections) ⬎ RT(false alarms) ⬎ RT(misses) ⬎ RT(hits). Consistent
with this, there was a numerical trend for RT(false alarm) ⬎
RT(miss) in the experimental data, but this difference was not
significant. It should be noted though that this pattern has been
found in some studies: Johnston et al. (1985; Experiment 1) found
that RTs to false alarms were indeed significantly slower than RTs
to misses (see ahead to the Simulation 2 section). Stark and
McClelland (2000) also observed numerical trends for RT(false
alarms) ⬎ RT(misses) for word stimuli (but reported no statistical
comparisons).
Why does the model predict, correctly, that (in some cases)
RT(false alarms) ⬎ RT(misses)? Consider a new item that has an
“average” f and is combined with a high value of er (to generate Jr
in Equation 2); this item will still have the same average value of
f when its RT is generated (in Equation 3), and it will be unlikely
to again be combined with a large value of ep. Thus, a new item
with a Jr value that exceeds C can be classified as a false alarm, but
it will not necessarily have a comparably short RT, because it is
unlikely that er and ep will both be large for the same item. The
reverse scenario occurs for misses: An old item with an average f
that is combined with a large negative value of er lowering its
value of Jr below C will be classified as a miss. When that same
value of f is used to predict the item’s RT, it will be unlikely to
again be combined with a large negative value of ep, meaning that
misses will not necessarily result in comparably long RTs, and the
RTs can be shorter than those of false alarms. (This property is
related to the phenomenon of regression to the mean.) Thus, the
inclusion of noise parameters in the model is important for it to
explain this result.
In the next simulation study, we turn to another set of results that
have been taken as evidence for distinct bases of priming and
recognition. In this case, we will show how the relative sizes of
RT(misses) and RT(false alarms) vary with ␮, and again, it is the
inclusion of the noise parameters that is critical in increasing the
model’s explanatory power.

Simulation Study 2: Johnston et al. (1985)
In a classic study by Johnston et al. (1985), participants read
items at study and identified ones that gradually clarified from a
mask at test. In their Experiment 1, the stimuli were words, and
recognition and priming were at levels greater than chance. The
order of RTs was RT(correct rejections) ⬎ RT(false alarms) ⬎
RT(misses) ⬎ RT(hits). In Experiment 2, the stimuli were nonwords, recognition and repetition priming were at levels lower than
those of Experiment 1, and the order of RTs changed to RT(correct
rejections) ⬎ RT(misses) ⬎ RT(false alarms) ⬎ RT(hits). Thus,
the pattern of RTs in Experiment 2 resembled that predicted by a
model of priming and recognition similar to the one presented here
but with no noise parameters (as discussed above). The results of

Experiment 2 were interpreted as evidence that recognition relied
primarily on a single memory signal when recognition performance was poor. However, because the pattern of RTs in Experiment 1 did not conform to the predictions of such a model,
Johnston et al. (1985, 1991) interpreted the RT(false alarm) ⬎
RT(miss) pattern as evidence that an additional memory factor
contributed to recognition when overall recognition performance
was higher. This article has been cited as evidence that priming
and recognition are mediated by different memory bases.
As shown in the simulation of our Experiment 1, inclusion of
decision noise allows the model to predict the RT(false alarm) ⬎
RT(miss) pattern. However, what is not clear is whether the model
predicts RT(false alarm) ⬍ RT(miss) when recognition is poor. To
investigate this, we applied the model to Experiments 1 and 2 of
Johnston et al. (1985). The values of ␴r, ␴f, and ␴p were kept from
the previous simulation, leaving ␮, s, and b as the three free
parameters for Experiment 1. The parameter s was held constant
across experiments, but it was necessary to change b (as well as ␮)
between experiments, resulting in two free parameters for Experiment 2. The change in b can be justified by the generally slower
RTs in Experiment 2 than Experiment 1. There were six degrees of
freedom in the data for each experiment (hit rate; false alarm rate;
RTs to hits, misses, false alarms, and correct rejections). The
parameter values are shown in Table 1, and the model results for
RTs are shown in Figure 2.
It can be seen that all of the model results for the RTs to hits,
misses, false alarms, and correct rejections are within the empirical
range. For the recognition task, the model results for the hit and
false alarm rates in Experiment 1 were .83 and .17, respectively
(Johnston et al.’s, 1985, hit rate ⫽ .70, 95% CI ⫽ .04; false alarm
rate ⫽ .21, 95% CI ⫽ .04). In Experiment 2, the model hit and
false alarm rates were .58 and .42, respectively (Johnston et al.’s,
1985, hit rate ⫽ .57, 95% CI ⫽ .04; false alarm rate ⫽ .29, 95%
CI ⫽ .04). Although the fits for two of the four hit and false alarm
rates were outside of the empirical range, the crucial aspect of
these results is that the model predicted RT(false alarms) ⬎
RT(miss) when recognition was high (in Experiment 1), and
RT(false alarm) ⬍ RT(miss) when recognition was low (in Experiment 2).
Furthermore, Johnston et al. (1985) also reported that the fluency effect (i.e., shorter RTs for hits and false alarms vs. misses
and correct rejections) was attenuated by recognition performance:
In Experiment 1, the effect was 310 ms, but in Experiment 2, the
effect was lower at 122 ms. The model also predicted this trend: In
Experiment 1, the fluency effect was 275 ms, whereas in Experiment 2, the fluency effect was 133 ms.
Why does the model predict a reversal in the RTs to misses and
false alarms at different levels of recognition performance? To
answer this question, we distinguish between two ways in which a
new item can have a value of Jr that exceeds C and be classified
as a false alarm. First, an item can have a relatively high value of
f that exceeds C even after being combined with er (to form Jr in
Equation 2). When a false alarm occurs in this way, an item’s RT
will tend to be comparably short because its value of f will still be
relatively high when its RT is generated (by combining it with ep
in Equation 3). Second, an item’s value of f may not exceed C
initially, but it does exceed C when it is combined with a high
value of er. As explained in the previous Discussion section, when
false alarms occur in this way, an item’s RT will not necessarily be
comparably short because when the same (relatively average or

PRIMING, RECOGNITION, AND FLUENCY

103

RTs because there will be relatively fewer old items that have
values of f that are initially below C. Thus, when ␮ is low, RTs to
false alarms can be shorter than RTs to misses and vice versa when
␮ is high. As was the case in the previous simulation study, the
inclusion of the noise parameters in the model is crucial for its
capacity to account for this pattern of results.
In sum, this simulation study showed that the model predicts
that the difference between RTs to misses and false alarms changes
as a function of recognition strength, as was observed by Johnston
et al. (1985). Thus, this finding also does not seem to compel an
account in which priming and recognition are mediated by distinct
memorial bases.

Simulation Study 3: Conroy et al. (2005)

Figure 2. Simulated and empirical data of Johnston et al.’s (1985) Experiments 1 and 2. Top panel: identification reaction times (RTs) for
Experiment 1. Bottom panel: identification RTs for Experiment 2. Each
simulated data point is based on 88 observations for each old–new stimulus
type and for 10,000 participants. Error bars indicate 95% confidence
intervals (estimated from Johnston et al., 1985). Hit ⫽ an old word judged
old; miss ⫽ an old word judged new; false alarm ⫽ a new word judged old;
correct rejection ⫽ a new word judged new.

low) f is used to generate its RT, it is unlikely to again be combined
with another large value of noise (ep).
When ␮ is low, the distributions of f for old and new items are
closer together, and there will be many more items with values of
f that initially exceed C (because the mean of the new item
distribution is closer to C). So when ␮ is low, the first cause of
false alarms (above; i.e., high f) will dominate, and false alarms
will have comparably short RTs. However, when ␮ is high, the
distributions of f are further apart, and there will be a much lower
number of items that have values of f that initially exceed C
(because the mean of the new item distribution is further from C).
Thus, when ␮ is high, false alarms will mainly arise through the
second cause (above; i.e., high er), and the RTs to false alarms will
not be comparably short. The reverse process occurs for old items:
When ␮ is low, misses will have comparably long RTs because
many more old items will have values of f that are initially below
C. When ␮ is high, misses will not tend to have comparably long

The simulation studies reported above have been concerned
with priming, recognition, and fluency in healthy adults. Next, we
turn to some recent and seemingly compelling evidence for distinct
memorial bases of priming and recognition in amnesia. Conroy et
al. (2005) investigated the contribution of fluency to recognition
judgments in two groups of amnesic patients: One had medial
temporal lobe lesions (MTL group, n ⫽ 2); the other had just
hippocampal lesions (H group, n ⫽ 3). In the study phase of
Conroy et al.’s Experiment 1, participants were told that words
would be presented but too briefly for conscious perception. In
fact, no words were presented. At test, words clarified from a
mask, and a recognition judgment was made after every identification. A fluency effect was found for the MTL and H groups (i.e.,
RT[items judged old] ⬍ RT[items judged new]), which was comparable in size to a control group (CON group, n ⫽ 8). In addition,
as an alternative method of measuring fluency, Conroy et al. took
a median split of the RTs and looked at the percentage of old
judgments in each half. More old judgments were made to words
identified in the quick half than in the slow half, and this effect did
not differ across groups. These results suggest that recognition
judgments in amnesic patients and the controls were influenced by
fluency of identification.
The study phase of Experiment 2 was genuine: Words were
presented, and participants read them aloud. The test phase of
Experiment 2 was the same as Experiment 1 except that the stimuli
were old or new. Relative to the control group, the H group was
impaired at recognition, and performance in the MTL group was
very close to chance. Despite this impairment in recognition,
amnesic patients showed levels of fluency and priming (faster RTs
for old than new words) that were comparable with the CON
group.
To the extent that fluency can give rise to a feeling of familiarity
and act as a basis of recognition (as suggested by, e.g., Jacoby &
Dallas, 1981; Mandler, 1980), Conroy et al. (2005) reasoned that
fluency from priming should contribute to recognition in amnesia,
yet clearly this was not the case. In a further test of this hypothesis,
Conroy et al. derived an estimate of recognition for each group,
given the observed magnitude of fluency and priming. They found
that the estimate of recognition was much lower than was actually
observed, suggesting that fluency from priming did not contribute
to recognition (see also Poldrack & Logan, 1997, for a related
finding). This, coupled with the dissociation between fluency and
priming on the one hand and recognition on the other in amnesia,
led Conroy et al. to argue for the independence of the memorial
bases of priming and recognition (see also Stark & Squire, 2000).

104

BERRY, SHANKS, AND HENSON

Is it necessary to interpret the results from Conroy et al. (2005)
with a multiple-systems view, or can they be explained by a
single-system account? Accordingly we attempted to simulate
their findings with the single-system model. Furthermore, one of
the MTL patients in Conroy et al.’s study, E. P., showed priming
in the absence of recognition (e.g., Conroy et al., 2005; Hamann &
Squire, 1997), presenting an additional challenge for the model.
How can the effects of amnesia be simulated with the model?
We simulated the performance of amnesic patients in Conroy et
al.’s (2005) Experiments 1 and 2 by assuming that, relative to
controls, there is a larger amount of noise in the encoded memory
signal and also in the assessment of that signal. More specifically,
the values of ␴f and ␴r were greater for our simulations of the
amnesic groups than the control group; the values of these parameters were also associated with the severity of the amnesia such
that they were greater in the more severe MTL group than the H
group. In more psychological terms, the greater value of ␴f in
amnesic patients represents greater variability in the degree to
which an item resonates with an underlying memory representation at test. The psychological meaning of ␴r can be described as
follows: The addition of er to f in Equation 2 is, in fact, formally
equivalent to adding er to the decision criterion C.6 Signal detection modelers have added variability to the decision criterion as far
back as Wickelgren (1968) and more recently to simulate the
receiver-operating characteristic slope of remember– know judgments (Wixted & Stretch, 2004). In this sense, a greater value of
␴r in amnesia represents a greater amount of variability in the
placement of the decision criterion from item-to-item, relative to
controls.7
Others have also modeled amnesic performance by introducing
greater amounts of noise into their simulations: For example, using
the retrieving-effectively-from-memory modeling framework,
Malmberg, Zeelenberg, and Shiffrin (2004) simulated the effects
of Midazolam-induced amnesia on recognition by assuming that
the storage of memory traces is noisier in a Midazolam group than
a control group. By varying the parameter c (the probability that an
item gets stored accurately) between groups, they were able to
reproduce patterns of results that had previously been taken as
evidence for a dual-process account of recognition memory.
The following simulations were carried out in a similar manner
to Simulation Studies 1 and 2 except that for Experiment 2, f
depended on whether an item was old or new, whereas in Experiment 1, all item values came from a single (new item) distribution.
The CON group data from Experiment 2 were chosen as a point of
departure for these simulations because these results bear the most
resemblance to the previous simulation studies (i.e., normal adult
participants who performed at levels greater than chance in priming and recognition). There were four free parameters for the
simulation of the CON group data: ␴p, s, ␮, and b. The values of
the parameters are shown in Table 1. Changes in ␴p and s from the
previous simulations were necessary to characterize the ensuing
effects of Conroy et al.’s (2005) different clarification task on RTs;
that is, there is bound to be greater variability in RTs as a result of
the longer clarification duration used (11 s; requiring an increase in
␴p), and priming/fluency effects in general were larger than in the
previous simulated studies (requiring an increase in s). Changes in
the b parameter across groups can be justified simply by the
different baseline levels of responding in each of the groups (e.g.,
the H group produced the fastest RTs overall, and therefore b is
lowest here). The parameter values of ␴p, s, and ␮ were then set for

the simulation of the MTL and H groups of this experiment. To
then simulate the increased noise associated with the encoding and
assessment of the memory signal in amnesia relative to the CON
group, we varied ␴f and ␴r according to the severity of amnesia
(greater for the MTL group). There were eight degrees of freedom
in the data for each condition (RTs to judged old and new items,
RTs to actual old and new items, percent correct in recognition, d⬘
for recognition, and the percentage of items judged old in the fast
and slow identification medians).
We simulated the data using the same number of trials as in the
experiments (40 trials per old–new stimulus type in Experiments 1
and 2) and using 10,000 simulated participants. The simulation
results for priming, fluency, and recognition for Experiment 2 are
shown in Figure 3. The error bars for the CON data are 95%
confidence intervals (estimated from Conroy et al., 2005), and
those for the MTL and H data are the range of data from the
patients in those groups (estimated from Conroy et al., 2005; the
range was used because of the limited amount of participant data
in the MTL and H groups). It can be seen from Figure 3 that the
model results lie within these intervals for all data points in
Experiment 2 and that the model gives very close fits to the (mean)
RTs for actual old–new and judged old–new items as shown in
Figure 4 (where error bars are unknown).
Conroy et al. (2005) also analyzed their recognition data with d⬘.
These results and those of the simulations are presented in Table 2.
It can be seen that there is a very close correspondence between the
data and simulation results.
In Experiment 2, Conroy et al. (2005) also looked at whether a
fluency effect was present within the subset of items that were new
(i.e., whether RT[false alarm] ⬍ RT[correct rejection]). The CON
group did not show this fluency effect for new items (false alarms:
8,839 ms; correct rejections: 8,831 ms), but the MTL group did
(false alarms: 9,180 ms; correct rejections: 9,706 ms). Conroy et
al. took this finding to mean that recognition was primarily based
on declarative memory in healthy adults (i.e., that responding was
not based on fluency), but that declarative memory did not affect
fluency-based responding in the MTL group (because the declarative memory necessary for recognition was lacking). (Conroy et
al., 2005, did not report these results for the H group.) Consistent
with Conroy et al.’s (2005) data, the model also predicted that
there would be a large fluency effect for new items in the MTL
group (false alarms: 9,182 ms; correct rejections: 9,767 ms), but
contrary to Conroy et al., the model predicted that there would be
a fluency effect—albeit a smaller one—for new items in the CON
group (false alarms: 8,505 ms; correct rejections: 8,861 ms). We
return to this difference between the prediction of the model and
the result of Conroy et al. in the Discussion section.
As found by Conroy et al. (2005), the model predicted that a
greater percentage of items identified quickly (items with RTs less
than the median) would be judged old than items identified slowly
(items with RTs greater than the median). These results are pre6

We are grateful to John Dunn for pointing this out.
We could have equally assumed that ␴p is greater in amnesic patients
relative to controls. However, increasing ␴p would have resulted in little
quantitative change in the simulation results, and the qualitative pattern of
results would not have been crucially altered. Therefore, ␴p is kept constant
across simulations of the amnesic and control groups.
7

PRIMING, RECOGNITION, AND FLUENCY

105

Figure 3. Priming, fluency, and recognition in Conroy et al.’s (2005) Experiment 2. Left panel: Priming effect
(identification time for new words minus identification time for old words). Center panel: Fluency effect
(identification time for words judged new minus the identification time for words judged old). Right panel:
Percentage of correct responses (hits plus correct rejections) in the recognition task. Error bars show 95%
confidence intervals of the means for controls (CON) and ranges of scores (estimated from Conroy et al., 2005)
for patients with medial temporal lobe lesions (MTL) or damage limited to the hippocampal regions (H). Circles
indicate model results. Each simulated data point is based on 40 observations for each old–new stimulus type
and for 10,000 participants. Note. From “On the Contribution of Perceptual Fluency and Priming to Recognition
Memory,” by M. A. Conroy, R. O Hopkins, and L. R. Squire, Cognitive, Affective, & Behavioral Neuroscience,
Volume 5, pp. 14 –20. Copyright (2005) by the Psychonomic Society. Adapted with permission.

sented in Table 3, and again it can be seen that the simulation
results are comparable with those of Conroy et al.
To estimate the role of fluency in recognition judgments, Conroy et al. (2005) asked what recognition performance would have
been had all of the items from the quick median half been judged
old and all of those in the slow median half been judged new.
These results are presented in Table 4. The low estimates of
percentage correct and d⬘ were taken as evidence that even if
judgments were entirely based on RTs, the RTs could not have
been a strong cue for recognition accuracy. A striking finding is
that when we performed the same analysis on our simulated
data, the estimates of recognition were also comparably low
(see Table 4).

Conroy et al. (2005) then conducted an analysis that was intended to give an estimate of the contribution of fluency from
priming to recognition. This involved calculating an estimate of
percentage correct based on the magnitude of the priming and
fluency effects for old and new words (for details, see Conroy et
al., 2005, p. 19). The recognition percentage correct estimates for
each group are presented in Table 5. These low estimates were
taken to indicate that priming and fluency do not significantly
contribute to recognition and that recognition must therefore be
based on some other memorial source. Again, we performed the
same analysis on the simulated data, the results of which are also
presented in Table 5. The percentage correct estimates were also
very low. Thus, the low levels of recognition accuracy estimated

Figure 4. Reaction times (RTs) to actual old–new words (left panel) and judged old–new (right panel) words
in Conroy et al.’s (2005) Experiment 2. Gray bars indicate Conroy et al.’s data, and circles indicate model results.
Each simulated data point is based on 40 observations for each old–new stimulus type and 10,000 simulated
participants. CON ⫽ control group; MTL ⫽ medial temporal lobe lesions group; H ⫽ hippocampal lesions
group.

BERRY, SHANKS, AND HENSON

106

Table 2
Recognition Performance (d⬘) in Conroy et al.’s (2005)
Experiment 2
Recognition accuracy (d⬘)
Group

Conroy et al.’s (2005)
Experiment 2

Simulation
Experiment 2

CON
H
MTL

1.31
0.59
0.19

1.31
0.62
0.19

Note. CON ⫽ control group; H ⫽ hippocampal lesions group; MTL ⫽
medial temporal lobe lesions group.

from the fluency effects calculated by Conroy et al. are not
inconsistent with a model in which a single memory strength
variable mediates priming and recognition. Because this variable is
subjected to independent sources of noise for each task, it can
appear as if there is a lack of relationship between priming and
recognition, even though they are driven by the same memory
strength signal.
Although our primary concern was to simulate the results of
Experiment 2, further support for the robustness of the model was
sought by applying it to Experiment 1. For all groups, the same
parameter values were retained from simulation of Experiment 2,
except for ␮, which was decreased from 0.37 to 0 (because there
was no study phase and therefore no influence of memory at test
in Experiment 1). The model results for the fluency effects in each
group, and also for the RT values from which they were derived,
are presented with Conroy et al.’s (2005) data in Figure 5. With the
exception of the fluency effect for the MTL group, all the model
results lie within the range of results observed by Conroy et al.
In Experiment 1, Conroy et al. (2005) also found that more old
judgments were made to words identified in the quick half than in
the slow half, and this effect did not differ significantly across
groups. These results are presented with the simulation results in
Table 6. This shows that the model predicts fluency effects for all
groups even when all items at test are new.

Discussion
The model presented here reproduces the dissociations between
priming, recognition, and fluency in amnesia reported by Conroy
et al. (2005). By assuming that there is a larger degree of noise in

the encoding and assessment of the memory signal in amnesic
patients than controls, the model predicted fluency and priming
effects for the amnesic groups that were comparable with controls,
despite impaired recognition in the H group relative to the CON
group, and near chance recognition in the MTL group. Furthermore, as calculated by Conroy et al., the model also predicted that,
even if judgments were based solely on speed of identification,
recognition would be low. The same parameter values were then
applied to Conroy et al.’s Experiment 1, in which there was no
influence of memory, and the model still predicted fluency effects
in all three groups of participants.
Conroy et al. (2005) found that the RTs for false alarms were
shorter than correct rejections for the MTL group in both experiments, indicating a relationship between fluency and recognition
judgments; however, this was only the case for the CON group in
Experiment 1, suggesting that the presence of declarative memory
interferes with fluency-based responding (in Experiment 2). The
model predicted an effect for the CON group in both experiments
(likewise for the MTL group). The evidence regarding this discrepancy in the CON data from other studies that have used
comparable study/test conditions to Conroy et al. is mixed: Verfaellie and Cermak (1999) also found no difference in RTs for
false alarms and correct rejections, whereas other studies have
reported a numerical trend for false alarms to be faster than correct
rejections (see, e.g., Johnston et al., 1985, 1991; Stark & McClelland, 2000). Indeed, in Experiment 1 of this article, there was a
numerical trend for RTs to false alarms to be shorter than those of
correct rejections (1,368 ms vs. 1,406 ms) when recognition memory was good.
In any case, the difference between the RTs to correct rejections
and false alarms in Conroy et al.’s (2005) study was smaller in the
CON group than the MTL group (⫺8 ms vs. 526 ms). In line with
this trend, the model also predicts that this difference is smaller in
the CON group than the MTL group (356 ms vs. 585 ms).
The model predicted very slightly lower priming effects in the
MTL and H groups than the CON group. This is necessarily the
case because priming and recognition depend on the same memory
source in the model, and variables will therefore tend to have
similar effects on performance in each task. This prediction therefore conflicts with the notion that priming is intact in amnesia (e.g.,
Hamann & Squire, 1997), an issue that has proven controversial
(see, e.g., Ostergaard, 1999). It is relevant to note, however, that
Verfaellie and Cermak (1999, Experiment 2), whose study has

Table 3
Percentage of Items Judged Old That Were Identified “Quickly” (Reaction Time ⬍ Median) and
“Slowly” (Reaction Time ⬎ Median) in Conroy et al.’s (2005) Experiment 2
Percentage of items judged old
Identified quickly

Identified slowly

Group

Conroy et al.’s (2005)
Experiment 2

Simulation

Conroy et al.’s (2005)
Experiment 2

Simulation

CON
H
MTL

57.8
62.5
66.3

59.9
58.9
58.6

38.7
49.0
46.2

40.0
40.9
41.5

Note.

CON ⫽ control group; H ⫽ hippocampal lesions group; MTL ⫽ medial temporal lobe lesions group.

PRIMING, RECOGNITION, AND FLUENCY

107

Table 4
Estimates of Recognition Performance If All Items Identified Quickly Were Judged Old and If
Items Identified Slowly Were Judged New in Conroy et al.’s (2005) Experiment 2
Percentage correct

d⬘

Group

Conroy et al.’s (2005)
Experiment 2

Simulation

Conroy et al.’s (2005)
Experiment 2

Simulation

CON
H
MTL

61.6
55.8
61.3

60.0
59.3
57.2

0.59
0.29
0.57

0.51
0.47
0.37

Note.

CON ⫽ control group; H ⫽ hippocampal lesions group; MTL ⫽ medial temporal lobe lesions group.

much in common with Conroy et al. (2005), did find that priming
was impaired in amnesic patients relative to controls.
Despite the fact that priming and recognition are mediated by a
common memory source in the model, it predicted a priming effect
(of 530 ms) for the MTL group when recognition was, for all
practical purposes, no different from chance (53.9% of the items
were recognized correctly, d⬘ ⫽ 0.19; see Figure 3). The severely
amnesic individual E. P. is reported to perform normally in tests of
priming despite chance performance in tests of recognition, and
this pattern is typically regarded as compelling evidence for priming and recognition being mediated by multiple memory systems
(e.g., Hamann & Squire, 1997; Stark & Squire, 2000). However, as
the above simulation results show, this pattern is compatible with
the single-system model (see also Kinder & Shanks, 2001): It
would be difficult to achieve sufficient statistical power to detect
an effect of the magnitude predicted (3.9% greater than chance).
Even if it can be convincingly shown that E. P.’s recognition
memory has been completely eliminated by his amnesia and yet
his priming performance has been untouched (as some have argued), we are still wary about drawing strong conclusions from
individual cases and would ideally like to see replications of this
pattern in other patients.

General Discussion
The main aim of these studies was to present an alternative
interpretation of three results that have been taken as evidence for
distinct memory bases for priming and recognition. First, in Experiment 1, we replicated Stark and McClelland’s (2000) observation of priming for old items that were not overtly recognized,
and then we showed that this result is predicted by a single-system
Table 5
Estimates of Recognition Performance Given the Observed
Magnitude of the Fluency Effect Within Each Group for Old
and New Words
Percentage correct estimate
Group

Conroy et al.’s (2005)
Experiment 2

Simulation

CON
H
MTL

52.2
50.8
52.6

52.0
51.7
51.3

Note. CON ⫽ control group; H ⫽ hippocampal lesions group; MTL ⫽
medial temporal lobe lesions group.

signal detection model in which one memory source drives priming and recognition. Second, the model was applied to the results
of Johnston et al. (1985). As found by Johnston et al., the model
predicted slower RTs to false alarms than misses when recognition
performance was relatively good, but it predicted that RTs to false
alarms would be quicker than RTs to misses when recognition was
lower. Third, in Simulation Study 3, by assuming that there is a
relatively large degree of noise in the encoding and assessment of
the memory signal in amnesia, the model reproduced the pattern of
intact fluency and priming on the one hand, and impaired recognition on the other, thus reproducing the dissociation between
amnesic patients and controls reported in Conroy et al.’s (2005)
study. The results of these simulations suggest that these three
types of finding are not necessarily indicative of multiple memory
sources in priming and recognition. The simulation results suggest
an alternative account to those that propose that distinct memory
bases mediate repetition priming and recognition (e.g., Squire,
1994; Wagner & Gabrieli, 1998; Wagner et al., 1997), namely that
a single memory source drives priming and recognition.
The results also have implications for dual-process accounts of
recognition that propose that fluency from priming can contribute
to recognition (e.g., Jacoby & Dallas, 1981; Johnston et al., 1991;
Mandler, 1980). As shown by Conroy et al. (2005), it is difficult to
obtain direct evidence for this notion when one estimates the
magnitude of recognition based on the identification of RTs to old
and new items. A similar conclusion was reached by Poldrack and
Logan (1997): Participants in their study made lexical decision
judgments to old or new items and gave a recognition judgment
after each decision. Discriminability between old and new items in
the lexical decision task was measured with the distance between
the standardized RT distributions for old and new items (dRT).
Values of dRT were significantly less than the observed values of
d⬘ for the recognition task and could account for only a small
proportion of recognition discrimination, suggesting that fluency
(response speed) could not have been the sole factor in recognition
judgments. Consistent with these findings, when we estimated
recognition performance in the model in a similar manner to
Conroy et al., the estimated contribution of fluency was also
minimal. From the perspective of the model, the fluency from
priming does not make a direct contribution to recognition, but
rather a common memory source supports above-chance performance in each task (i.e., there is a common cause rather than a
causal chain). Thus, although low estimates of the contribution of
fluency to recognition seem to suggest a lack of a relationship
between priming and recognition, this result is not inconsistent
with a single-system account.

BERRY, SHANKS, AND HENSON

108

Figure 5. Fluency effects (left panel) and reaction times (RTs; right panel) to judged old and judged new words
in Conroy et al.’s (2005) Experiment 1. Error bars show 95% confidence intervals of the means for the control
(CON) group and ranges of individual scores (estimated from Conroy et al., 2005) for the hippocampal lesions
(H) and medial temporal lobe lesions (MTL) groups. Circles indicate simulations based on 40 observations per
stimulus type for 10,000 participants.

A limitation of the model concerns the use of fluency as a
heuristic in recognition: For example, Johnston et al. (1991) found
that when the identification and recognition trials were blocked,
rather than interleaved, fluency effects did not occur. This was
taken as evidence that interleaving the identification and recognition trials encouraged a reliance on speed of identification as a
heuristic. The reason the model does not predict a difference
between blocked and interleaved versions of the task is because the
same value of f is used to determine an item’s RT and its recognition judgment; in other words, there is a relationship between an
item’s RT and its likelihood of being judged old (see Equations 2
and 3). There is much evidence to suggest that other manipulations
can affect the probability with which fluency is used as a cue for
recognition (e.g., Jacoby & Whitehouse, 1989; Kinder, Shanks,
Cock, & Tunney, 2003; Whittlesea et al., 1990), though the model
in its current state does not speak to the use of fluency as a
heuristic. It has been suggested (e.g., by Levy, Stark, & Squire,
2004) that because manipulations designed to enhance fluency
tend to increase the proportion of old judgments to old and new
items, such manipulations merely influence decision bias and not
recognition accuracy. If this were the case, then the model would
be able to account for this quite readily by allowing the decision
criterion, C, to vary.

Dissociations between priming and recognition are widely taken
as support for a multiple-systems view. For example, in normal
adults, levels of processing manipulations have large effects on
recognition but much smaller ones on priming (Brown & Mitchell,
1994; Jacoby & Dallas, 1981), and changes in modality between
study and test have been shown to produce the opposite pattern—
priming is reduced, but recognition is relatively unaffected. We
have already shown that the model can account for the pattern
produced by levels of processing manipulations: In another article
(Berry, Henson, & Shanks, 2006), the model simulated large
effects of an attentional manipulation on recognition but much
smaller ones on priming (in a perceptual identification task).
However, dissociations—such as the one produced by changes in
modality—are more challenging for the model, and the model in
its current state does not account for this. However, from a signal
detection point of view, once one starts to take into account
modality, a single dimension of strength may no longer be appropriate, and a multidimensional approach may be required.
Double dissociations have also been reported in patients: Individuals with damage to the right-occipital lobes show impaired
priming despite relatively intact recognition, thus showing the
reciprocal dissociation to amnesic patients (Gabrieli et al., 1995).
Although, again, it is not clear how the model would be able to

Table 6
Percentage of Items Judged Old That Were Identified “Quickly” (Reaction Time ⬍ Median) and
“Slowly” (Reaction Time ⬎ Median) in Conroy et al.’s (2005) Experiment 1
Percentage of items judged old
Identified quickly

Identified slowly

Group

Conroy et al.’s (2005)
Experiment 1

Simulation

Conroy et al.’s (2005)
Experiment 1

Simulation

CON
H
MTL

64.4
59.2
61.3

56.3
57.0
58.4

48.4
50.0
35.0

43.8
42.7
41.8

Note.

CON ⫽ control group; H ⫽ hippocampal lesions group; MTL ⫽ medial temporal lobe lesions group.

PRIMING, RECOGNITION, AND FLUENCY

account for this dissociation, another single-system model, the
SRN (Kinder & Shanks, 2003), has been shown to have some
success at simulating this pattern. Kinder and Shanks (2003)
assumed that individuals with amnesia had a generalized (rather
than a specific) learning deficit, whereas individuals with rightoccipital lobe damage had a deficit in visual processing. A double
dissociation emerged from the SRN solely because of the way that
the assumed nature of the deficits and differences in task procedures interacted with a single underlying memory representation.
Moreover, it is relevant to note here that the use of double
dissociations to infer distinct systems has been criticized, and their
interpretation is widely debated (see, e.g., Dunn & Kirsner, 2003;
Plaut, 1995). The findings from the studies that we have looked at
in this article have analyzed identification RTs according to the
recognition response, and as such, they constitute evidence from a
different domain that does not rely on the logic of dissociation (at
least in Simulation Studies 1 and 2).
Does the model make other predictions to those presented in
this article that can be tested? As mentioned above, in Berry,
Henson, and Shanks’s (2006) study, by assuming that the variance of the noise associated with the perceptual identification
task is greater than that of the recognition task, we showed how
the model could simulate large effects of an attentional manipulation at study on recognition while simulating much smaller
ones on priming. The model also correctly predicted that the
reliability of the recognition task would be consistently greater
than that of the priming task (as measured by split-half correlations; cf. Buchner & Wippich, 2000). In normal adults, the
model also predicts that the sensitivity of the recognition task
will not exceed that of the priming task (e.g., performance on
the priming task will not exceed that of the recognition task
when compared on the same response metric). This prediction
held for all conditions of Berry, Henson, and Shanks. Similarly,
Berry, Shanks, and Henson (2006) found that even when priming and recognition tasks were completely comparable in every
way except for task instructions, and recognition was at chance,
the sensitivity of the priming task never exceeded that of the
recognition task.
Moreover, in unpublished simulations, we have applied the
model to a modified CID-R paradigm in which, after every two
identification trials, the items from those trials are re-presented
for a two-alternative forced choice (2AFC) recognition judgment. Because the model assumes that greater values of f will
lead to faster identification RTs and also to a greater likelihood
of an old judgment, it predicts that the item judged old on a
2AFC trial will also tend to have the shorter identification RT.
The single-system model makes this prediction, regardless of
whether the items presented on the 2AFC trial are both new,
both old, or one is old and the other is new. Different predictions are made by a “dual-system” version of the model, which
is identical in all respects to the single-system model except that
after an item’s identification RT has been calculated, another
value of f is sampled to calculate Jr. In other words, the value
of f is different for priming and recognition (albeit sampled
from the same distribution). In contrast to the single-system
model, this dual-system version of the model predicts that on
2AFC trials in which both items are old or both are new, the
item judged old will not tend to have the shorter identification
RT. However, on 2AFC trials in which one item is old and the
other is new, it predicts, like the single-system model, that the

109

item judged old will also tend to have the shorter identification
RT (because of priming). This highlights an advantage of the
approach we are using, which is that quantitative predictions of
single- and dual-system versions of the model can be tested
empirically.
Finally, another advantage of the approach that we are advocating is that it is based on signal detection theory. Signal
detection theory is widely accepted as a plausible framework
for theorizing about recognition, and this framework has been
successful in accounting for a variety of phenomena (although
there is debate as to the precise form that a signal detection
model should take; e.g., Wixted, 2007, vs. Parks & Yonelinas,
2007). Many models of recognition have been proposed that
also include a role for signal detection theory (e.g., Gillund &
Shiffrin, 1984; Hintzman, 1984, 1988; Murdock, 1982, 1983).
However, these models have not been used to also account for
priming (one exception is the retrieving-effectively-frommemory modeling framework; see Schooler, Shiffrin, & Raaijmakers, 2001). Kinder and Shanks’s (2001, 2003) model has
been applied to priming and recognition but has never been
shown to be compatible with a broad range of recognition
phenomena. From a single-system perspective, a logical step is
to use signal detection theory to also account for priming; we
have tried to do this here by assuming that the same memory
strength variable that drives recognition also drives priming.
The model that we propose is simple, is based on general
principles, and is relatively easy to implement.
In conclusion, the results from studies discussed in this
article that have been taken as evidence for distinct memory
bases of priming and recognition are not inconsistent with a
single-system account in which one memory signal drives priming and recognition and is subjected to different nonmemorial
sources of noise. We regard it as important that before a
multiple-systems approach is advanced, researchers need to
show that a single-system model is unable to account for their
data patterns or has critical limitations. Indeed, in a future
project we plan to conduct a formal comparison of single- and
dual-system versions of the model. Whether or not the model
stands up to further tests, we do believe it is an important step
forward to have a formal, quantitative model of priming, recognition, and fluency to use as a benchmark.

References
Berry, C. J., Henson, R. N. A., & Shanks, D. R. (2006). On the relationship
between repetition priming and recognition memory: Insights from a
computational model. Journal of Memory and Language, 55, 515–533.
Berry, C. J., Shanks, D. R., & Henson, R. N. A. (2006). On the status of
unconscious memory: Merikle and Reingold (1991) revisited. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 32, 925–
935.
Brown, A. S., & Mitchell, D. B. (1994). A revaluation of semantic versus
nonsemantic processing in implicit memory. Memory & Cognition, 22,
533–541.
Buchner, A., & Wippich, W. (2000). On the reliability of implicit and
explicit memory measures. Cognitive Psychology, 40, 227–259.
Coltheart, M. (1981). The MRC psycholinguistic database. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 33, 497–505.
Conroy, M. A., Hopkins, R. O., & Squire, L. R. (2005). On the contribution
of perceptual fluency and priming to recognition memory. Cognitive,
Affective, & Behavioral Neuroscience, 5, 14 –20.

110

BERRY, SHANKS, AND HENSON

Dunn, J. C., & Kirsner, K. (2003). What can we infer from double
dissociations? Cortex, 39, 1–7.
Feustel, T. C., Shiffrin, R. M., & Salasoo, A. (1983). Episodic and lexical
contributions to the repetition effect in word identification. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 112, 309 –346.
Gabrieli, J. D. (1998). Cognitive neuroscience of human memory. Annual
Review of Psychology, 49, 87–115.
Gabrieli, J. D. E., Fleischman, D. A., Keane, M. M., Reminger, S. L., &
Morrell, F. (1995). Double dissociation between memory systems underlying explicit and implicit memory in the human brain. Psychological
Science, 6, 76 – 82.
Gillund, G., & Shiffrin, R. M. (1984). A retrieval model for both recognition and recall. Psychological Review, 91, 1– 67.
Hamann, S. B., & Squire, L. R. (1997). Intact perceptual memory in the
absence of conscious memory. Behavioral Neuroscience, 111, 850 –
854.
Hintzman, D. L. (1984). MINERVA 2: A simulation model of human
memory. Behavior Research Methods, Instruments & Computers, 16,
96 –101.
Hintzman, D. L. (1988). Judgments of frequency and recognition memory
in a multiple-trace memory model. Psychological Review, 95, 528 –551.
Jacoby, L. L., & Dallas, M. (1981). On the relationship between autobiographical memory and perceptual learning. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 110, 306 –340.
Jacoby, L. L., & Whitehouse, K. (1989). An illusion of memory: False
recognition influenced by unconscious perception. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 118, 126 –135.
Johnston, W. A., Dark, W. J., & Jacoby, L. L. (1985). Perceptual fluency
and recognition judgments. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 11, 3–11.
Johnston, W. A., Hawley, K. J., & Elliot, M. G. (1991). Contribution
of perceptual fluency to recognition judgments. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 17,
210 –223.
Kelley, C. M., & Rhodes, M. G. (2002). Making sense and nonsense of
experience: Attributions in memory and judgment. The Psychology of
Learning and Motivation, 41, 293–320.
Kinder, A., & Shanks, D. R. (2001). Amnesia and the declarative/
procedural distinction: A recurrent network model of classification,
recognition, and repetition priming. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience,
13, 648 – 669.
Kinder, A., & Shanks, D. R. (2003). Neuropsychological dissociations
between priming and recognition: A single-system connectionist account. Psychological Review, 110, 728 –744.
Kinder, A., Shanks, D. R., Cock, J., & Tunney, R. J. (2003). Recollection, fluency, and the explicit/implicit distinction in artificial grammar learning. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 132,
551–565.
Kucera, H., & Francis, W. N. (1967). Computational analysis of present
day American English. Providence, RI: Brown University Press.
Levy, D. A., Stark, C. E. L., & Squire, L. R. (2004). Intact conceptual
priming in the absence of declarative memory, Psychological Science,
15, 680 – 686.
Macmillan, N. A., & Creelman, C. D. (2005). Detection theory: A user’s
guide (2nd ed.). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Malmberg, K. J., Zeelenberg, R., & Shiffrin, R. M. (2004). Turning up the
noise or turning down the volume? On the nature of the impairment of
episodic recognition memory by Midazolam. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 30, 540 –549.
Mandler, G. (1980). Recognizing: The judgment of previous occurrence.
Psychological Review, 87, 252–271.
Murdock, B. B. (1982). A theory for the storage and retrieval of item and
associative information. Psychological Review, 89, 609 – 626.
Murdock, B. B. (1983). A distributed memory model for serial-order
information. Psychological Review, 90, 316 –338.

Ostergaard, A. L. (1992). A method for judging measures of stochastic
dependence: Further comments on the current controversy. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 18, 413–
420.
Ostergaard, A. L. (1999). Priming effects in amnesia: Now you see them,
now you don’t. Journal of the International Neuropsychological Society,
5, 175–190.
Parks, C. M., & Yonelinas, A. P. (2007). Moving beyond pure signaldetection models: Comment on Wixted (2007). Psychological Review,
114, 188 –202.
Pike, R. (1973). Response latency models for signal detection. Psychological Review, 80, 53– 68.
Plaut, D. C. (1995). Double dissociations without modularity: Evidence
from connectionist neuropsychology. Journal of Clinical and Experimental Neuropsychology, 17, 291–321.
Poldrack, R. A., & Logan, G. D. (1997). Fluency and response speed in
recognition judgments. Memory & Cognition, 25, 1–10.
Ratcliff, R., & Murdock, B. B. (1976). Retrieval processes in recognition
memory. Psychological Review, 83, 190 –214.
Roediger, H. L., & McDermott, K. B. (1993). Implicit memory in normal
human subjects. In F. Boller & J. Grafman (Eds.), Handbook of neuropsychology (Vol. 8, pp. 63–131). Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Schacter, D. L., & Tulving, E. (Eds.). (1994). Memory systems 1994.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Schooler, L. J., Shiffrin, R. M., & Raaijmakers, J. G. W. (2001). A
Bayesian model for implicit effects in perceptual identification. Psychological Review, 108, 257–272.
Schott, B. H., Henson, R. N., Richardson-Klavehn, A., Becker, C., Thoma,
V., Heinze, H., & Duzel, E. (2005). Redefining implicit and explicit
memory: The functional neuroanatomy of priming, remembering, and
control of retrieval. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
USA, 102, 1257–1262.
Schott, B. H., Richardson-Klavehn, A., Henson, R. N. A., Becker, C.,
Heinze, H., & Duzel, E. (2006). Neuroanatomical dissociation of encoding processes related to priming and explicit memory. Journal of Neuroscience, 26, 792– 800.
Shanks, D. R., & Perruchet, P. (2002). Dissociation between priming and
recognition in the expression of sequential knowledge. Psychonomic
Bulletin & Review, 9, 362–367.
Shanks, D. R., Wilkinson, L., & Channon, S. (2003). Relationship between
priming and recognition in deterministic and probabilistic sequence
learning. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 29, 248 –261.
Squire, L. R. (1994). Declarative and nondeclarative memory: Multiple
brain systems supporting learning and memory. In D. L. Schacter & E.
Tulving (Eds.), Memory systems 1994 (pp. 203–231). Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Squire, L. R. (2004). Memory systems of the brain: A brief history and
current perspective. Neurobiology of Learning and Memory, 82, 171–
177.
Stark, C. E. L., & McClelland, J. L. (2000). Repetition priming of words,
pseudowords, and nonwords. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 26, 945–972.
Stark, C. E. L., & Squire, L. R. (2000). Recognition memory and familiarity judgments in severe amnesia: No evidence for a contribution of
repetition priming. Behavioral Neuroscience, 114, 459 – 467.
Stretch, V., & Wixted, J. T. (1998). On the difference between strengthbased and frequency-based mirror effects in recognition memory. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 24,
1379 –1396.
Turk-Browne, N. B., Yi, D. J., & Chun, M. M. (2006). Linking implicit and
explicit memory: Common encoding factors and shared representations.
Neuron, 49, 917–927.
Verfaellie, M., & Cermak, L. S. (1999). Perceptual fluency as a cue for
recognition judgments in amnesia. Neuropsychology, 13, 198 –205.

PRIMING, RECOGNITION, AND FLUENCY
Wagner, A. D., & Gabrieli, J. D. E. (1998). On the relationship between
recognition familiarity and perceptual fluency: Evidence for distinct
mnemonic processes. Acta Psychologica, 98, 211–230.
Wagner, A. D., Gabrieli, J. D. E., & Verfaellie, M. (1997). Dissociations
between familiarity processes in explicit recognition and implicit perceptual memory. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 23, 305–323.
Whittlesea, B. W., Jacoby, L. L., & Girard, K. (1990). Illusions of immediate
memory: Evidence of an attributional basis for feelings of familiarity and
perceptual quality. Journal of Memory and Language, 29, 716 –732.
Wickelgren, W. A. (1968). Unidimensional strength theory and component
analysis of noise in absolute and comparative judgments. Journal of
Mathematical Psychology, 5, 102–122.
Wixted, J. T. (2007). Dual-process theory and signal-detection theory of
recognition memory. Psychological Review, 114, 152–176.

111

Wixted, J. T., & Stretch, V. (2004). In defense of the signal-detection
interpretation of remember/know judgments. Psychonomic Bulletin &
Review, 11, 616 – 641.
Yonelinas, A. P., Regehr, G., & Jacoby, L. L. (1995). Incorporating
response bias in a dual-process theory of memory. Journal of Memory
and Language, 34, 821– 835.
Zaki, S., Nosofsky, R. M., Jessup, N. M., & Unverzagt, F. W. (2003).
Categorization and recognition performance of a memory-impaired
group: Evidence for single-system models. Journal of the International
Neuropsychological Society, 9, 394 – 406.

Received November 8, 2006
Revision received August 5, 2007
Accepted August 20, 2007 䡲

