Journal of Personality and Social Psychology
2008, Vol. 94, No. 1, 158 –167

Copyright 2008 by the American Psychological Association
0022-3514/08/$12.00 DOI: 10.1037/0022-3514.94.1.158

Poignancy: Mixed Emotional Experience in the Face of Meaningful
Endings
Hal Ersner-Hershfield, Joseph A. Mikels, Sarah J. Sullivan, and Laura L. Carstensen

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Stanford University
The experience of mixed emotions increases with age. Socioemotional selectivity theory suggests that
mixed emotions are associated with shifting time horizons. Theoretically, perceived constraints on future
time increase appreciation for life, which, in turn, elicits positive emotions such as happiness. Yet, the
very same temporal constraints heighten awareness that these positive experiences come to an end, thus
yielding mixed emotional states. In 2 studies, the authors examined the link between the awareness of
anticipated endings and mixed emotional experience. In Study 1, participants repeatedly imagined being
in a meaningful location. Participants in the experimental condition imagined being in the meaningful
location for the final time. Only participants who imagined “last times” at meaningful locations
experienced more mixed emotions. In Study 2, college seniors reported their emotions on graduation day.
Mixed emotions were higher when participants were reminded of the ending that they were experiencing.
Findings suggest that poignancy is an emotional experience associated with meaningful endings.
Keywords: mixed emotions, poignancy, endings, aging, socioemotional selectivity theory

offer evidence that limited time in the context of meaningful
experience gives rise to poignancy.

When John Updike described baseball legend Ted Williams’
last time at bat, he wrote that the experience “crowd[ed] the throat
with joy” (Updike, 1960, p. 112). In doing so, Updike eloquently
captured the phenomenon of poignancy: Watching his baseball
hero’s final swing simultaneously evoked positive and negative
emotions. Recent research has shown that in everyday life, older
people experience mixed emotions, such as happiness and sadness,
more so than their younger counterparts and that this cooccurrence of positive and negative emotion becomes more frequent with age (Carstensen, Pasupathi, Mayr, & Nesselroade,
2000; Ong & Bergeman, 2004). In socioemotional selectivity
theory (SST), Carstensen and colleagues (2000) argued that this
occurs because older adults are more aware of limited time than
younger adults and that the experience of “last times” increases
with age (Carstensen, 2006; Carstensen, Fung, & Charles, 2003;
Carstensen, Isaacowitz, & Charles, 1999). Consequently, even
relatively positive everyday events become tinged with mixed
emotions. However, a causal link between limited time and emotional experience has not been documented. The present studies

Aging, Emotion, and Limited Time
Over the past two decades, research on emotional functioning
and emotional experience reveal more consistency than change in
aging individuals. Most aspects of emotional experience are quite
stable. Older adults do not differ from younger adults in the
subjective intensities of self-reported emotions (see Levenson,
2000, for a review) or in the profiles of physiological reactivity
(Levenson, Carstensen, Friesen, & Ekman, 1991; Levenson,
Carstensen, & Gottman, 1994). The spontaneous production of
emotional faces and other aspects of emotional expressive behavior (Levenson et al., 1991; Tsai, Levenson, & Carstensen, 2000)
also appear to change little.1 However, despite stability in the
experience of elicited emotions, everyday emotional experience
does change with age. Most notably, relative to their younger
counterparts, older adults report fewer negative emotional experiences (Carstensen et al., 2000; Gross et al., 1997; Mroczek &
Kolarz, 1998), especially reductions in anger (Lawton, Kleban, &
Dean, 1993; Magai, 1999), coupled with increases in positive
affect (Mroczek & Kolarz, 1998) or sustained levels of positive
emotions (Carstensen et al., 2000). Furthermore, there is some
evidence that older adults experience more complex emotional
experiences. For example, among the young– old, written descriptions of emotion are more complex (Labouvie-Vief, DeVoe, &
Bulka, 1989), and positive and negative emotions co-occur more
frequently (Carstensen et al., 2000; Ong & Bergeman, 2004).
SST is a life-span theory of motivation that maintains that as
time passes and people approach endings, activities that are devoid

Hal Ersner-Hershfield, Joseph A. Mikels, Sarah J. Sullivan, and Laura
L. Carstensen, Department of Psychology, Stanford University.
Joseph A. Mikels is now at the Department of Human Development,
Cornell University, and Sarah J. Sullivan is now at the Department of
Psychology, University of California, Los Angeles.
This research was supported in part by National Institute on Aging Grant
RO1-8816 awarded to Laura L. Carstensen and by a grant from the Norman
H. Anderson fund. We thank Sam Maglio and Gina Schiel for their
assistance in collecting data as well as Jennifer Heil, Anthony Ong, Nilam
Ram, Rick Robins, Ewart Thomas, Jeanne Tsai, and the members of the
Bay Area Affective Science Training Program for helpful discussions of
statistical and conceptual issues.
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Hal
Ersner-Hershfield, Department of Psychology, Stanford University, 450
Serra Mall, Stanford, CA 94305. E-mail: haleh@psych.stanford.edu

1

Note, however, that Malatesta-Magai, Jonas, Shepard, and Culvert
(1992) found older adults to be more expressive.
158

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

ENDINGS AND EMOTION

of meaning are less interesting and desirable. Interest in novel
information— because it is closely linked to future needs—
declines. Instead, the increasing awareness of time constraints
focuses attention on the present, and this temporal shift increases
the value that people place on the most important aspects of life.
Thus, SST posits that when the future is seen as expansive and
endings are not acutely anticipated, greater focus is placed on
knowledge-related goals and information seeking. By contrast,
when individuals approach endings, they are motivated to pursue
emotionally meaningful goals and focus more on the here and now
(Carstensen, 1995; Carstensen et al., 1999). This increased focus
on pursuing emotionally meaningful goals in the present leads to
an intensified desire for and ultimate experience of more positive
emotion and less negative emotion over time, as is observed with
older adults. However, when time is constrained and people become progressively aware of the finitude of life, emotional experiences become increasingly more complex. Such states are positive given the pursuit of emotional goals but come to entail a mix
of negative emotions because endings, by their very nature, also
increase the anticipation of last times.

Mixed Emotions
The concept of poignancy presumes the experience of mixed
emotions. Evidence exists that positive and negative emotions do
occur closely together, if not simultaneously.2 At an empirical
level, Williams and Aaker (2002), for instance, found that participants felt both happy and sad after viewing certain advertisements. Additionally, Larsen, McGraw, and Cacioppo (2001) demonstrated that participants felt both happy and sad on move-out
day, on graduation day, and after watching the movie Life is
Beautiful. Thus, although most emotional experiences are either
positive or negative, there appear to be circumstances that give rise
to mixed emotional experiences.

159

progress through life gives rise to an appreciation of life’s fragility
along with an awareness that the most cherished aspects of life are
fleeting. Lazarus’s (1991) appraisal theory suggests that such a
sense of loss is normally associated with sadness. However, because feelings of poignancy also involve the knowledge that one is
progressing through life, a sense of happiness is evoked as well.
Accordingly, we postulate that poignancy comprises a mixture of
happiness and sadness that occurs when one faces meaningful
endings.
To date, causal relationships among aging, anticipated endings,
and mixed emotions remain theoretical. In particular, SST posits
that the associations between aging and poignancy are accounted
for by perceived constraints on time. If the sense of limited time
rather than changes in processes associated with aging causes
changes in emotional experience, then younger adults in limitedtime situations should also, theoretically, experience comparable
emotional states as older adults under experimental conditions that
constrain time.
Although previous research has demonstrated that older adults
experience poignancy more frequently than younger adults
(Carstensen et al., 2000; Ong & Bergeman, 2004), there is no
empirical evidence to suggest that older adults experience poignancy in an ever-present ubiquitous fashion. Mailing a letter or
brushing one’s teeth may be no more likely to elicit poignancy in
an older person than a younger person. Seeing an old friend,
however, may generate different experiences for the old and the
young. In theoretical terms, poignancy occurs in the face of significant endings that signify the passage of time. SST suggests that
a sense of limited time causes an individual to focus on emotionally meaningful aspects of life. Poignancy, then, may arise not only
when time is limited but also when individuals are faced with the
potential loss of something emotionally meaningful.

Overview of the Present Research
Defining Poignancy
Mixed emotions can take on many different forms, be it a
combination of anger and joy, disgust and satisfaction, or embarrassment and sadness. But unlike these other instances of mixed
emotions, poignancy seems to be particular to the experience of
endings, of no longer having something that one once had. And,
we maintain that whereas the anticipation of an ending is not a
necessary component of other mixed emotions, it is integral to the
experience of poignancy. For example, nostalgia (Wildschut,
Sedikides, Arndt, & Routledge, 2006), which although also composed of mixed emotions, involves thinking back on momentous
experiences that have already occurred, rather than experiencing or
anticipating endings. Our view is consistent with that of philosopher Karl Duncker, who argued that poignancy results from recognizing that something once possessed is or will no longer be
present: “A feeling of not having takes on a greater poignancy if it
is a no-longer-having, a loss (whether of something actually or
almost possessed)” (Duncker, 1941, p. 418). In Duncker’s framework, then, it is the awareness or anticipation of not having
something that one once had that breeds poignancy. Duncker’s
theorizing speaks directly to the intimate relationship between
poignancy and endings in life that mark the passage of time. The
heightened sense of mortality that occurs naturally as individuals

In the present studies, we tested the link between limited-time
horizons and the experience of mixed emotions. In Study 1,
participants in one of two conditions were induced through systematic imagery to imagine that they were in a meaningful location. Limited time was manipulated by instructing participants in
the experimental condition to imagine that they were in the location for the final time. In Study 2, participants were asked to report
their emotions during the real-life ending of college graduation.
We sought to test two hypotheses: First, under controlled conditions in a laboratory setting, does limited time give rise to the
experience of poignancy? If poignancy results from appreciating
the fragility of life through the lens of limited time, then imagining
doing something meaningful for the final time, such as spending
time at a favorite location, should produce poignancy, regardless
of age. Accordingly, in Study 1, we expected that participants in
the experimental condition would experience more poignancy dur2

Although it remains contested whether differently valenced emotions
can co-occur (Cacioppo & Berntson, 1994; Russell & Carroll, 1999), it
should be noted that the plausibility of mixed emotional experiences does
not play a role in this debate. Rather, the central question in this dispute
concerns whether individual positive and negative emotions can co-occur
at the exact same moment in time (Feldman Barrett & Russell, 1998).

ERSNER-HERSHFIELD ET AL.

160

ing the limited-time guided imagery induction than participants in
the control condition.
Second, we examined whether a real-life ending could produce
the experience of poignancy and whether placing emphasis on this
ending could heighten the experience of poignancy. As such, in
Study 2, we hypothesized that college seniors would experience
poignancy on their graduation day and that drawing attention to the
natural ending would increase this sense of poignancy.

Experimental Procedures

Study 1

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Method
Research Participants
Sixty younger participants (25 men, 35 women; M ⫽ 19.62
years; 50% Caucasian, 25% African American, 25% “other”) and
60 older participants (26 men, 34 women; M ⫽ 77.47 years;
81.67% Caucasian, 16.67% African American, 1.66% “other”)
took part in the study. Younger participants received course credit
or were paid $25 for their participation. Older participants were
paid $25 for their participation. There were no significant differences between age groups in household income, t(107) ⫽ ⫺0.02,
p ⫽ .98. Table 1 depicts the descriptive statistics for participant
information from Study 1.

Materials
An IBM R-40 Thinkpad with E-Prime software (Schneider,
Eschman, & Zuccolotto, 2002) was used for stimulus presentation
and data acquisition. Participants completed a number of measures
to assess demographic background variables, physical health, and
cognitive abilities. Together, these measures provide descriptive
information.
Wahler Physical Health Inventory (Wahler, 1973). The
Wahler Physical Health Inventory measures each participant’s
subjective interpretation of his or her physical health. Participants
are asked to rate the extent to which they are bothered by 42
different physical health symptoms.
Wechsler Digit Span Test (Wechsler, 1997). The Wechsler
Digit Span Test requires participants to repeat a string of numbers
forward and backward. Considered a test of short-term memory, it

Table 1
Participant Characteristic Information in Study 1
Younger
(n ⫽ 60)

Older
(n ⫽ 60)

Variable

M

SD

M

SD

Age
Household income ($ in K)
Digit Span
Forward
Backward
Verbal Fluency
Animal
F, A, S naming
Wahler Physical Symptoms

19.63
63.39

1.40
59.77

77.47
63.58

6.88
47.80

9.88
8.72

2.42
2.73

7.88
6.15

2.19
2.41

21.92
14.88
44.10

4.73
3.45
22.33

14.95
11.78
37.60

4.83
3.60
22.22

Note. K ⫽ thousands.

has been normed for older adults and correlates well with general
intelligence.
F, A, S, and Category Naming Task (Spreen & Benton, 1977).
Verbal fluency was assessed by asking participants to name as
many “F,” “A,” and “S” words as they could in 60 s. Participants
were then asked to name as many members of the category
“animal” as they could in 60 s.

Participants first read and signed a consent form and then
completed a demographics questionnaire. To eliminate variation in
the experimental induction, instructions for each scenario were
recorded using iTunes software and were played for participants.
Participants were seated in front of the computer and were instructed to do the following: “Think of a place that has personal
significance to you. Please think of a specific, meaningful location
that you go to with people whom you care about.” After the
participant had selected a meaningful location, the experimenter
recorded the location.
Participants were then taken through three guided imagery induction trials. In the first trial, participants were given the following instructions:
Please close your eyes. Now please take a moment to imagine being
at the location that you just described. As best you can, place yourself
in the location. Notice your surroundings. Notice any people whom
you are with, their faces, and voices. Take in everything that you see.
Listen carefully to the sounds of your surroundings. Take a deep
breath and notice the smells. Notice the air on your skin. Now take
whatever time you need to fully experience the sights, sounds, and
smells of the environment and the overall experience of the location.
When you are ready, please open your eyes.

Upon completing this induction, all participants completed an
emotion questionnaire on the computer in which they rated the
degree to which they were experiencing each of 19 different
emotions (positive: accomplishment, amusement, contentment, excitement, happiness, interest, joy, and pride; negative: anger, anxiety, boredom, disgust, embarrassment, fear, frustration, guilt, irritation, sadness, and shame) on a 7-point scale ranging from 1 (not
at all) to 7 (extremely).
The second guided imagery induction trial immediately followed this emotion questionnaire and was identical to the first trial
in all but one respect: In this trial, participants were asked to
imagine the experience of being at their favorite location as if they
were there in 2 months’ time. After this guided imagery induction,
all participants completed the same emotion questionnaire again.
In the third guided imagery induction, participants in the control
condition were asked to imagine the experience of being at their
favorite location as if they were there in 4 months’ time. Control
participants then completed the emotion questionnaire for the final
time. In the experimental limited-time condition, however, participants were asked to imagine the experience of being at their
favorite location as if they were there in 4 months’ time and,
importantly, as though this would be the last time that they would
be able to visit the meaningful location. After finishing the third
trial, participants in the experimental condition then completed the
emotion questionnaire for the final time. Thus, the experimental
manipulation occurred during the third trial.

ENDINGS AND EMOTION

All participants then completed a series of tasks and questionnaires, composed of the Digit Span Test (Wechsler, 1997), the
Verbal Fluency task (Spreen & Benton, 1977), and the Wahler
Physical Health Inventory (Wahler, 1973).

Results and Discussion

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Preliminary Analyses
On the Wahler Physical Health Inventory, younger and older
adults were not significantly different in their self-reported physical health, t(118) ⫽ 0.16, p ⫽ .88. On the cognitive tasks, younger
adults generated more words in the “F, A, S naming” verbal
fluency task, t(118) ⫽ 4.82, p ⬍ .001, and named significantly
more animals in the “animal” verbal fluency task, t(118) ⫽ 7.98,
p ⬍ .001. Younger adults also performed significantly better in the
forward Digit Span Test, t(118) ⫽ 4.75, p ⬍ .001, and the
backward Digit Span Test, t(118) ⫽ 5.46, p ⬍ .001. Table 1
depicts the descriptive statistics for these measures.

Operationalizing Poignancy
Previous research has operationalized poignancy generally as
the co-occurrence of positive and negative emotion (Carstensen et
al., 2000). To measure co-occurrence in their experience-sampling
procedure study, Carstensen et al. (2000) computed, for each
participant, a Pearson’s r correlation between positive and negative
emotion across 35 sampling occasions. Accordingly, r values near
zero were associated with a greater degree of co-occurrence,
whereas highly negative r values indicated that positive and negative emotion were not often present during the same sampling
occasion. However, because the present investigation was concerned with one emotional reaction as a function of a specific
time-limiting manipulation, a correlational analysis was not feasible. Rather, a more immediate measure of mixed emotions was
needed.
In the literature on attitudinal ambivalence, Kaplan (1972) proposed a metric that could be used to assess the degree to which
attitudes or feelings were mixed about an object or event. Recently, Kaplan’s (1972) metric has been used to capture mixed
emotions (Wildschut et al., 2006). Using Kaplan’s (1972) formula,
mixed emotions were defined as:
ME ⫽ PA ⫹ NA ⫺ 兩PA ⫺ NA兩.
In this equation, ME refers to mixed emotions, PA to average
positive affect, and NA to average negative affect. However, as
noted by Priester and Petty (1996), Kaplan’s (1972) formula can be
reduced to simply two times the minimum amount of PA and NA.
Thus, it is easier to conceptualize mixed emotions as the minimum
of PA and NA. Such an approach has been taken by both Schimmack (2001) and Larsen, McGraw, Mellers, and Cacioppo (2004).
More important, the MIN formula assigns a high mixed emotion
score to experiences in which positive and negative emotions are
both relatively high. For example, if PA ⫽ 3 and NA ⫽ 2, then the
mixed emotion score would equal 2; if PA ⫽ 4 and NA ⫽ 3, then
the mixed emotion score would equal 3. Indeed, we have argued
that a poignant experience represents such a mix of emotions,
indicating that the MIN formula is appropriate for our purposes.
Emotional experiences that are unidirectional in nature (i.e., cases

161

in which the score of one emotion is very low and the other is
moderate or high) receive the lowest possible mixed emotion
score. So, for a case in which PA ⫽ 3 and NA ⫽ 1, the mixed
emotion score would equal 1; likewise, for a case in which PA ⫽
5 and NA ⫽ 1, the mixed emotion score would again equal 1. Both
experiences are similarly unidirectional and, as such, receive low
mixed emotion scores.
However, because our conceptualization of poignancy involves
the positive emotion of happiness3 and the negative emotion of
sadness, the mixed emotions measure that we use here is defined
as:
ME ⫽ MIN关Happiness, Sadness兴,
where ME refers to mixed emotions and MIN refers to minimum.

Tests of Main Hypotheses
Changes in happiness and sadness. Before exploring the
mixed emotion scores, we examined changes in happiness and
sadness independently. A repeated measures analysis of variance
(ANOVA) with two between-subjects factors (age group: young,
old; condition: control, experimental) and two within-subjects
factors (time: first imagery induction time trial, second imagery
induction time trial, third imagery induction time trial; valence:
positive, negative) was used to examine the effect of the experimental limited-time manipulation on happiness and sadness. Results indicated that there was a main effect of valence, such that all
participants experienced a greater degree of happiness relative to
sadness, F(1, 116) ⫽ 218.35, p ⬍ .001. There was no Age
Group ⫻ Valence interaction, indicating that older adults and
younger adults experienced similar amounts of sadness and happiness. Table 2 depicts the happiness and sadness emotion mean
scores for all three time trials for both conditions and age groups.
Moreover, results indicated that the limited-time manipulation
significantly affected participants’ emotional experience. Specifically, a Time ⫻ Valence interaction, F(2, 115) ⫽ 48.43, p ⬍ .001,
was qualified by a significant Time ⫻ Valence ⫻ Condition
three-way interaction, F(2, 115) ⫽ 30.17, p ⬍ .001. To examine
the nature of this interaction, we ran paired samples t tests so that
happiness and sadness before the experimental limited-time manipulation could be directly compared with happiness and sadness
after the experimental limited-time manipulation. Specifically,
participants in the control condition exhibited a significant decrease in happiness from the second imagery induction time trial to
the third imagery induction time trial, t(59) ⫽ 2.73, p ⬍ .01. It is
possible that this decrease in positive emotion was a function of
simple habituation to the initial happiness experienced (Frijda,
1988). Tellingly, control condition participants showed no comparable change in terms of sadness, indicating that in the absence
of a limited-time manipulation, the experience of this emotion does
not change from the second imagery induction time trial to the
third imagery induction time trial, t(59) ⫽ ⫺0.38, p ⫽ .70. By
contrast, the participants in the experimental condition showed
changes in both happiness and sadness. These participants showed
3
Although other emotions, such as joy, are closely related to happiness,
for the sake of parsimony, we opted to use a single indicator of positive
emotion (happiness) and a single indicator of negative emotion (sadness).

ERSNER-HERSHFIELD ET AL.

162

Table 2
Happiness and Sadness Means and Standard Deviations by Time Trial and Condition for Both Age Groups in Study 1
Happiness
Time 1

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Variable
Younger
Control
Exp.
Older
Control
Exp.
Total
Control
Exp.
Note.

Sadness

Time 2

Time 3

Time 1

Time 2

Time 3

M

SD

M

SD

M

SD

M

SD

M

SD

M

SD

6.13
6.00

0.90
1.05

6.10
5.87

0.96
1.50

5.47
4.60

1.70
1.55

2.03
2.77

1.75
1.63

1.93
2.63

1.67
1.71

2.13
5.43

1.66
1.72

6.00
6.23

1.41
1.04

5.97
5.73

1.22
1.34

5.63
4.47

1.50
2.39

2.47
1.87

2.17
1.41

2.50
2.03

2.06
1.47

2.40
5.33

2.19
2.25

6.07
6.12

1.18
1.04

6.03
5.80

1.08
1.41

5.55
4.53

1.59
2.00

2.25
2.32

1.98
1.58

2.22
2.33

1.88
1.61

2.27
5.38

1.93
1.94

For the Younger group, n ⫽ 60, with n ⫽ 30 in each condition. For the Older group, n ⫽ 60, with n ⫽ 30 in each condition. Exp. ⫽ Experimental.

a significant decrease in happiness from the second imagery trial to
the third imagery trial, t(59) ⫽ 4.81, p ⬍ .001, and a significant
increase in sadness from the second imagery trial to the third
imagery trial, t(59) ⫽ ⫺10.20, p ⬍ .001. As such, the paired
samples t tests revealed that the limited-time manipulation caused
participants to experience more sadness and less happiness. Note,
however, that although experimental condition participants
showed a trend toward experiencing more sadness than happiness,
t(29) ⫽ ⫺1.99, p ⫽ .052, these participants were nevertheless
endorsing happiness at a level that was above the midpoint of the
scale. Put another way, participants in the experimental condition
maintained levels of happiness above the midpoint of the scale
despite a spike in sadness. More important, there were no age
group interactions, indicating that both older and younger adults
were affected by the limited-time manipulation in similar ways.
Again, see Table 2 for the happiness and sadness mean scores and
standard deviations for all three time trials for both conditions and
age groups.
Changes in mixed emotions. The decrease in happiness and
increase in sadness suggest a more mixed emotional experience as
a function of the limited-time manipulation. But because these
changes in emotional experience correspond to mean-level
changes across participants, they do not speak to changes in
emotional experience within individuals. To examine changes in
emotional experience within individuals, we calculated mixed
emotion scores for each participant, as described above, using the
MIN measure. We ran a repeated measures ANOVA on these
scores with two between-subjects factors (age group: young, old;
condition: control, experimental) and one within-subjects factor
(time: first imagery induction time trial, second imagery induction
time trial, third imagery induction time trial). Results indicated that
there was a main effect of time, such that mixed emotions increased over the course of the three imagery inductions, F(2,
115) ⫽ 8.68, p ⬍ .001. This main effect of time was qualified by
a significant Time ⫻ Condition interaction, F(2, 115) ⫽ 12.33,
p ⬍ .001. To elucidate this Time ⫻ Condition interaction, we ran
paired samples t tests so that the experience of mixed emotions
before the limited-time induction could be directly compared with
the experience of mixed emotions after the limited-time induction.
Participants in the control condition showed no significant change

in mixed emotions from the second imagery induction trial to the
third imagery induction trial, t(59) ⫽ 0.64, p ⫽ .53. Participants in
the experimental condition, in contrast, showed a significant increase in mixed emotions from the second imagery induction trial
to the third imagery induction trial, t(59) ⫽ ⫺5.03, p ⬍ .001. This
increase in mixed emotions, then, can be attributed to the limitedtime manipulation that occurred between the second guided imagery induction trial and the third guided imagery induction trial.
Figure 1 depicts the mixed emotion scores for all three guided
imagery induction time trials for both conditions. Finally, there
was no significant Age Group ⫻ Condition interaction, nor was
there a Time ⫻ Condition ⫻ Age Group three-way interaction,
indicating that both age groups responded to the limited-time
manipulation in similar ways.
Examining the relationship between happiness and sadness.
As noted above, the limited-time manipulation caused participants’
happiness to decrease and their sadness to increase, leading to a
mixed emotional state. However, was this emotional experience
reflective of a qualitatively distinct, “mixed” state? Or, was this
result just a reflection of an inverse relationship between happiness
and sadness? For participants in both conditions, there was no
relationship between happiness and sadness on the first two guided
imagery induction trials, control participants: r(58) ⫽ ⫺.14, p ⫽
.29 and r(58) ⫽ ⫺.22, p ⫽ .09; experimental participants: r(58) ⫽
⫺.23, p ⫽ .08 and r(58) ⫽ ⫺.16, p ⫽ .23. However, for the third
imagery induction, because of the changing nature of happiness
and sadness, participants in both conditions exhibited moderate
negative correlations between happiness and sadness, control participants: r(58) ⫽ ⫺.36, p ⬍ .005; experimental participants:
r(58) ⫽ ⫺.39, p ⬍ .005.
In summary, we examined whether limited time resulted in the
mixed emotional experience of poignancy. Results indicated that
the limited-time manipulation gave rise to a significant increase in
the experience of sadness and a significant decrease in the experience of happiness. Furthermore, upon examining the mixed emotions metric, we found that those participants in the experimental
condition experienced an increase in mixed emotions as a function
of the limited-time manipulation. More important, envisioning
endings did not turn a positive experience into a negative experience; rather, it added a component of sadness to an already happy

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

ENDINGS AND EMOTION

163

Figure 1. Mixed emotions scores for control and experimental conditions in all three time trials in Study 1.
Shading for Times 1 and 2 are similar in order to represent the contrast of interest with Time 3. Error bars
represent standard error of the mean.

experience. These findings held true for both younger and older
age groups, suggesting that a meaningful limited-time situation4
such as an ending can produce poignancy regardless of age.
However, this study was conducted in a laboratory setting using
hypothetical endings. To what extent, then, does poignancy arise
during an actual ending in the real world? To address this issue, we
conducted a second study in which emotions were assessed during
a real ending.

Study 2
In Study 1, we demonstrated that a meaningful ending gave rise
to the experience of poignancy. In that study, we used a guided
imagery induction in a laboratory setting to evoke poignancy.
Although past research has demonstrated that guided imagery
inductions can be used as an effective tool to generate an emotional experience (Gerrardshesse, Spies, & Hesse, 1994), a question remains: Do endings in a natural setting also elicit poignancy?
Furthermore, can the salience of an ending be emphasized to
amplify the feeling of poignancy? To answer these questions, in
Study 2, we surveyed graduating college students about their
emotional experiences on graduation day. For some participants,
we emphasized the ending that they were experiencing (limitedtime condition), whereas for other participants, we did not emphasize the ending that they were experiencing (control condition). It
is important to note that because all participants were experiencing
an ending, we expected feelings of poignancy to be relatively high
in both conditions. However, because we placed emphasis on the
ending in the limited-time condition, we expected poignancy to be
even higher in that condition than in the control condition.

Method
Participants
One hundred ten graduating seniors at Stanford University (49
men, M ⫽ 22.06 years; 56 women, M ⫽ 21.80 years, and 5
participants who failed to report their age or gender) participated in
the study. Seniors were approached on graduation day, June 18,
2006, and asked whether they would like to participate in a brief
survey about their experiences.

Experimental Procedure
Study 2 was composed of two between-subjects conditions. In
each condition, participants were asked to rate the degree that they
were experiencing each of 19 different emotions on a 7-point scale
(positive: accomplishment, amusement, contentment, excitement,
happiness, interest, joy, and pride; negative: anger, anxiety, bore4
In Study 1, the endings that participants imagined were also meaningful. SST suggests that the sense of limited time causes an individual to
focus on things in life that are emotionally meaningful. Do even mundane
everyday experiences become meaningful under limited-time conditions?
Alternatively, are mixed emotions restricted to emotionally meaningful
situations? In order to disentangle these factors, we conducted a side study
in which meaning and time limitations were experimentally manipulated.
Results indicated that for participants imagining the experience of being at
a nonmeaningful location, very little emotion was experienced, and, accordingly, a limited-time manipulation did not produce significant changes
in emotional experience.

ERSNER-HERSHFIELD ET AL.

dom, disgust, embarrassment, fear, frustration, guilt, irritation,
sadness, and shame). In the control condition (n ⫽ 59), participants
were given the following instructions: “Keeping in mind your
current experiences, please rate the degree to which you feel each
of the following emotions,” and were then presented with the list
of 19 emotions. In the limited-time condition (n ⫽ 51), in which
emphasis was placed on the ending that they were experiencing,
participants were given the following instructions: “As a graduating senior, today is the last day that you will be a student at
Stanford. Keeping that in mind, please rate the degree to which
you feel each of the following emotions,” and were then presented
with the list of 19 emotions.

5

Mixed Emotions Score

164

4

3

2

1

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Control

Results and Discussion

Limited Time

Figure 2. Mixed emotions scores for control and limited-time conditions
in Study 2. Error bars represent standard error of the mean.

Differences in Happiness and Sadness
As in Study 1, we first sought to examine differences in happiness and sadness as a function of the limited-time manipulation.
Independent samples t tests were used to examine the effect of the
limited-time manipulation on happiness and sadness. Participants
in the two conditions showed no difference in positive emotion,
t(108) ⫽ 0.08, p ⫽ .93. However, as a function of the limited-time
manipulation, there was a significant difference in sadness,
t(108) ⫽ ⫺2.34, p ⬍ .05, such that participants in the limited-time
condition experienced more sadness than participants in the control condition. More important, similar to Study 1, participants in
the experimental condition were still experiencing happiness at a
level that was greater than the midpoint of the scale. In fact, in this
naturalistic examination of poignancy, despite the ending they
were facing, participants in both conditions exhibited more happiness than sadness, control condition: t(58) ⫽ ⫺9.68, p ⬍ .001;
experimental condition: t(50) ⫽ ⫺6.28, p ⬍ .001. Table 3 depicts
the happiness and sadness mean scores for participants in both
conditions.

Differences in Mixed Emotions
Just as in Study 1, mixed emotion scores were calculated for
each participant. An independent samples t test was used to examine whether these scores differed as a function of condition. As
hypothesized, making the ending of graduation day more salient
caused participants in the limited-time condition to show higher
mixed emotion scores than participants in the control condition,
t(108) ⫽ ⫺2.34, p ⬍ .05. Figure 2 depicts the means of the mixed
emotion scores in both conditions from Study 2.

Table 3
Happiness and Sadness Means and Standard Deviations by
Condition in Study 2
Happiness

Sadness

Condition

M

SD

M

SD

Control
Limited time

5.49
5.47

1.22
1.39

3.07
3.82

1.70
1.67

Note. For the control group, n ⫽ 59. For the limited-time group, n ⫽ 51.

It is important to note that although participants in the control
condition were not reminded of the ending that they were experiencing, they were experiencing an ending just the same, as evidenced by their relatively high mixed emotion scores. In fact,
mixed emotion scores from control condition participants in this
study were significantly higher than the mixed emotion scores
from control condition participants in Study 1, t(117) ⫽ ⫺3.50,
p ⬍ .005. These results indicate that a natural ending can produce
the experience of poignancy. Furthermore, when participants were
reminded of the ending that they were experiencing, feelings of
poignancy were heightened.

Examining the Relationship Between Happiness and
Sadness
In Study 1, we found a negative relationship between happiness
and sadness for participants in both the control and experimental
conditions. Because participants repeatedly imagined being at a
meaningful location and were then asked to imagine a final time
there, it is possible that a bias in affective forecasting might have
led to this negative correlation. In previous studies, Gilbert, Wilson, and colleagues have demonstrated that when thinking about
future events, people tend to overestimate how negative they will
actually feel and underestimate how positive they will actually feel
(Gilbert, Pinel, Wilson, Blumberg, & Wheatley, 1998; Wilson &
Gilbert, 2003, 2005). It is possible, then, that because participants
in Study 1 were asked to make judgments regarding feelings they
would experience during a hypothetical ending, they reported
feeling more sadness and less happiness than they would when
facing an actual ending in the real world. Such an inflation of
sadness and deflation of happiness perhaps led to the negative
correlation between the two emotions. Because our measure of
emotion in Study 2 involved a real-world examination of poignancy, we did not expect there to be a strong negative relationship
between happiness and sadness. Indeed, in Study 2, the correlations between happiness and sadness were nonsignificant, control
condition: r(57) ⫽ .17, p ⫽ .21; experimental condition: r(49) ⫽
.26, p ⫽ .07. Unlike our hypothetical exercise in the laboratory
setting, in the case of a real-life ending, it seems that both emotions
related to each other in a slightly positive direction.

ENDINGS AND EMOTION

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

General Discussion
We maintain that the experience of poignancy can be considered
a mixed emotional experience that occurs when one is reminded of
the passing of time during a meaningful experience. To test the
causal link between endings and the experience of mixed emotions, we measured participants’ emotional responses while
imagining a visit to a meaningful location for the last time.
Results from Study 1 indicated that the limited-time manipulation gave rise to a significant decrease in the experience of
happiness and a significant increase in the experience of sadness from baseline. Moreover, upon examining the mixed emotions scores, we found that a sense of limited time did indeed
produce a mixed emotional experience. It should be noted that
this mixed emotional experience was not unidirectionally negative in nature but rather remained positive as well. Hence, one
critical component to the experience of poignancy appears to be
a sense of limited time. Results from Study 2 showed that
real-life endings outside of the laboratory also produce a sense
of poignancy. As such, we provide evidence that the experience
of poignancy involves mixed emotions in the face of a meaningful ending.
Our conceptualization of poignancy arises out of the observation
that chronological age is correlated with mortality. Subsequently,
in daily life, we postulate that older people are more aware of
endings than younger people are. We hypothesized that endings
provoke a mixed emotional experience because a sense of limited
time focuses individuals on emotionally meaningful goals. Such
goals tend to be positive in nature, yet, because an ending highlights the passing of time, it also gives rise to an increase in
negative emotion. Previous research has demonstrated that older
adults experience such poignant states more often than younger
adults (Carstensen et al., 2000; Ong & Bergeman, 2004), but the
extent to which this change in emotional experience is due to a
sense of limited time and not simply the result of changes in other
processes associated with aging has not been explored. More
important, in both studies we demonstrated that the experience of
poignancy occurs equally in younger and older adults. Thus, here
we provide the first evidence that some of the changes in emotional experience associated with aging (viz. poignancy) are a
result of facing a meaningful ending rather than a result of chronological age per se.
Although these results provide experimental support for the
assertion that certain age-related changes in emotional experience are due to a shift in time perspective, alternative possibilities have been offered to address mixed emotions in old age.
Williams and Aaker (2002), for instance, have proposed that
older adults experience co-occurring positive and negative emotions because they are more likely than younger adults to accept
the duality of emotional experience. In other words, compared
with younger adults, older adults are better able to recognize
that emotions do not have to be experienced in a unidirectional
way. Such an explanation for poignancy is not necessarily at
odds with SST’s account that poignancy arises as a result of
limited time. It is possible, for example, that limited time can
also cause an individual to be more accustomed to accepting
duality. Just the same, future research should attempt to disentangle these two explanations of poignancy.

165

Our findings lend support to Cacioppo and colleagues’ contention that mixed emotional experiences can and do occur
(Cacioppo & Berntson, 1994; Cacioppo, Gardner, & Berntson,
1999). As demonstrated in both studies, when individuals face
endings, emotional experience includes a mixture of happiness
and sadness. But although emotional experience is mixed, these
results do not speak to the nature of the behavioral output, or
action tendency (Lazarus, 1991) that would arise from the
experience of poignancy. Previous research makes us doubtful
that the action tendency of poignancy— or the action tendency
of any emotion for that matter—would be mixed (Feldman
Barrett & Russell, 1998). Lazarus (1991), for example, has
noted that the action tendency of happiness is to approach
others and share with them one’s positive outcomes. On the
contrary, sadness leads to a state of withdrawal and avoidance
of others (Frijda, 1988). In theory, then, the action tendency of
poignancy would most likely be singularly valenced. Future
studies are necessary, however, to discern the nature of behavioral responses to mixed emotional experiences.
We found that poignant experiences entailed a mix of happiness and sadness. Was this experience truly mixed? Or, were
our results a reflection of an inverse relationship between the
two emotions? Although it is true that there was a significant
negative correlation between happiness and sadness for participants experiencing poignancy in the experimental condition of
Study 1, r(58) ⫽ ⫺.39, p ⬍ .005, it should be noted that this
correlation is moderate in magnitude (Cohen, 1988) and not
large, as might be expected if positive emotions simply replaced
negative emotions. Furthermore, we found a trend toward a
positive relationship between happiness and sadness in our
real-world examination of poignancy. As noted above, the
discrepancy between the correlations from Study 1 and Study 2
might be a function of a bias in affective forecasting that
occurred during Study 1 but not Study 2. Unlike Study 1, in
Study 2, participants were asked to report how they felt during
a real-life ending. Understandably, we did not obtain a similar
negative correlation. Nevertheless, future research should be
conducted to further examine the relationship between happiness and sadness during mixed emotional experiences. Furthermore, in both Study 1 and Study 2, we found that the mix of
happiness and sadness that participants felt was characterized
by the addition of sadness to an already happy experience. Put
another way, the endings did not in themselves produce the
experience of happiness. However, it could be the case that
some special cases of endings will actually give rise to both
happiness and sadness. Future research should attempt to document various types of endings and the effects that they have on
poignancy.
Lastly, researchers such as Larsen, Hemenover, Norris, and
Cacioppo (2003) and Spiegel (1998) have noted that the coactivation of positive and negative emotion can often be an important
step in the coping process, for the ability to face and accept
negative life events is a crucial aspect of the healing course.
Spiegel, Bloom, Kraemer, and Gottheil (1989) found, for example,
that breast cancer patients who underwent group therapy and
expressed the full range of their emotions lived twice as long as
control patients who were in no such therapy group. Similarly,
Bower, Kemeny, Taylor, and Fahey (1998) demonstrated that
bereaved HIV-seropositive men showed positive health outcomes

ERSNER-HERSHFIELD ET AL.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

166

when they both confronted stressors in their lives and found a
sense of meaning in the trauma that they had undergone. Finally,
Carstensen et al. (2000) found that emotional complexity in everyday life is associated with less neuroticism and better emotional
control. Thus, to the degree that mixed emotional experiences can
aid in the coping process, poignancy may be a special case of a
mixed emotional experience that may help individuals in dealing
with anticipated loss.
In summary, findings from the present studies lend further
support to the notion that certain age-related changes in emotional
experience are due to the experience of limited time and are not
necessarily a result of organic processes associated with aging,
such as the degradation of physical or cognitive abilities. As SST
predicts, a sense of limited time, when coupled with the loss of
something emotionally meaningful, produces the experience of
poignancy.

References
Bower, J. E., Kemeny, M. E., Taylor, S. E., & Fahey, J. L. (1998).
Cognitive processing, discovery of meaning, CD4 decline, and AIDSrelated mortality among bereaved HIV-seropositive men. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 66, 979 –986.
Cacioppo, J. T., & Berntson, G. G. (1994). Relationship between attitudes
and evaluative space: A critical review, with emphasis on the separability of positive and negative substrates. Psychological Bulletin, 115,
401– 423.
Cacioppo, J. T., Gardner, W. L., & Berntson, G. G. (1999). The affect
system has parallel and integrative processing components: Form follows function. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 76, 839 –
855.
Carstensen, L. L. (1995). Evidence for a life-span theory of socioemotional
selectivity. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 4, 151–156.
Carstensen, L. L. (2006, June 30). The influence of a sense of time on
human development. Science, 312(5782), 1913–1915.
Carstensen, L. L., Fung, H. L., & Charles, S. T. (2003). Socioemotional
selectivity theory and emotion regulation in the second half of life.
Motivation and Emotion, 27, 103–123.
Carstensen, L. L., Isaacowitz, D. M., & Charles, S. T. (1999). Taking time
seriously: A theory of socioemotional selectivity. American Psychologist, 54, 165–181.
Carstensen, L. L., Pasupathi, M., Mayr, U., & Nesselroade, J. (2000).
Emotional experience in everyday life across the adult life span. Journal
of Personality and Social Psychology, 79, 644 – 655.
Cohen, J. (1988). Statistical power analysis for the behavioral sciences
(2nd ed.). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Duncker, K. (1941). On pleasure, emotion, and striving. Philosophy and
Phenomenological Research, 1, 391– 430.
Feldman Barrett, L., & Russell, J. A. (1998). Independence and bipolarity
in the structure of current affect. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 74, 967–984.
Frijda, N. H. (1988). The laws of emotion. American Psychologist, 43,
349 –358.
Gerrardshesse, A., Spies, K., & Hesse, F. W. (1994). Experimental inductions of emotional states and their effectiveness: A review. British
Journal of Psychology, 85, 55–78.
Gilbert, D. T., Pinel, E. C., Wilson, T. D., Blumberg, S. J., & Wheatley,
T. P. (1998). Immune neglect: A source of durability bias in affective
forecasting. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 75, 617– 638.
Gross, J. J., Carstensen, L. L., Pasupathi, M., Tsai, J., Skorpen, C. G., &
Hsu, A. Y. C. (1997). Emotion and aging: Experience, expression, and
control. Psychology and Aging, 12, 590 –599.
Kaplan, K. J. (1972). On the ambivalence-indifference problem in attitude

theory and measurement: A suggested modification of the semantic
differential technique. Psychological Bulletin, 77, 361–372.
Labouvie-Vief, G., DeVoe, M., & Bulka, D. (1989). Speaking about
feelings: Conceptions of emotion across the life span. Psychology and
Aging, 4, 425– 437.
Larsen, J. T., Hemenover, S. H., Norris, C. J., & Cacioppo, J. T. (2003).
Turning adversity to advantage: On the virtues of the coactivation of
positive and negative emotions. In L. G. Aspinwall & U. M. Staudinger
(Eds.), A psychology of human strengths: Perspectives on an emerging
field (pp. 211–216). Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
Larsen, J. T., McGraw, A. P., & Cacioppo, J. T. (2001). Can people feel
happy and sad at the same time? Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 81, 684 – 696.
Larsen, J. T., McGraw, A. P., Mellers, B. A., & Cacioppo, J. T. (2004). The
agony of victory and thrill of defeat: Mixed emotional reactions to
disappointing wins and relieving losses. Psychological Science, 15(5),
325–330.
Lawton, M. P., Kleban, M. H., & Dean, J. (1993). Affect and age:
Cross-sectional comparisons of structure and prevalence. Psychology
and Aging, 8, 165–175.
Lazarus, R. S. (1991). Emotion and adaptation. New York: Oxford University Press.
Levenson, R. W. (2000). Expressive, physiological, and subjective changes
in emotion across adulthood. In S. H. Qualls & N. Abeles (Eds.),
Psychology and the aging revolution: How we adapt to longer life (pp.
123–140). Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
Levenson, R. W., Carstensen, L. L., Friesen, W. V., & Ekman, P. (1991).
Emotion, physiology, and expression in old age. Psychology and Aging,
6, 28 –35.
Levenson, R. W., Carstensen, L. L., & Gottman, J. M. (1994). Influence of
age and gender on affect, physiology, and their interrelations: A study of
long-term marriages. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 67,
56 – 68.
Magai, C. (1999). Affect, imagery, attachment: Working models of interpersonal affect and the socialization of emotion. In J. Cassidy & P.
Shaver (Eds.), Handbook of attachment theory and research (pp. 787–
802). New York: Guilford Press.
Malatesta-Magai, C. Z., Jonas, R., Shepard, B., & Culvert, C. (1992). Type
A personality and emotional expressivity in younger and older adults.
Psychology and Aging, 7, 551–561.
Mroczek, D. K., & Kolarz, C. M. (1998). The effect of age on positive and
negative affect: A developmental perspective on happiness. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 75, 1333–1349.
Ong, A. D., & Bergeman, C. S. (2004). The complexity of emotions in later
life. Journal of Gerontology: Psychological Sciences, 59B, 117–122.
Priester, J. R., & Petty, R. E. (1996). The gradual threshold model of
ambivalence: Relating the positive and negative bases of attitudes to
subjective ambivalence. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
71, 431– 449.
Russell, J. A., & Carroll, J. M. (1999). On the bipolarity of positive and
negative affect. Psychological Bulletin, 125, 3–30.
Schimmack, U. (2001). Pleasure, displeasure, and mixed feelings? Are
semantic opposites mutually exclusive? Cognition & Emotion, 15, 81–
97.
Schneider, W., Eschman, A., & Zuccolotto, A. (2002). E-Prime user’s
guide [Computer software and manual]. Pittsburgh, PA: Psychology
Software Tools.
Spiegel, D. (1998). Getting there is half the fun: Relating happiness to
health. Psychological Inquiry, 9, 66 – 68.
Spiegel, D., Bloom, J. R., Kraemer, H. C., & Gottheil, E. (1989). Effects
of psychosocial treatment on survival of patients with metastatic breast
cancer. Lancet, 2, 888 – 891.
Spreen, O., & Benton, A. L. (1977). Neurosensory Center Comprehensive

ENDINGS AND EMOTION

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Examination for Aphasia. Victoria, BC: Neuropsychology Laboratory,
University of Victoria.
Tsai, J. L., Levenson, R. W., & Carstensen, L. L. (2000). Autonomic,
subjective, and expressive responses to emotional films in older and
younger Chinese Americans and European Americans. Psychology and
Aging, 15, 684 – 693.
Updike, J. (1960, October 22). Hub fans bid kid adieu. The New Yorker,
109 –131.
Wahler, H. J. (1973). Wahler Physical Symptoms Inventory. Los Angeles:
Western Psychological Services.
Wechsler, D. (1997). WAIS-III Administration and scoring manual. San
Antonio, TX: Psychological Corporation.
Wildschut, T., Sedikides, C., Arndt, J., & Routledge, C. (2006). Nostalgia:

167

Content, triggers, functions. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 91, 975–993.
Williams, P., & Aaker, J. L. (2002). Can mixed emotions peacefully
coexist? Journal of Consumer Research, 28, 636 – 649.
Wilson, T. D., & Gilbert, D. T. (2003). Affective forecasting. Advances in
Experimental Social Psychology, 35, 345– 411.
Wilson, T. D., & Gilbert, D. T. (2005). Affective forecasting: Knowing
what to want. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 14(3), 131–
134.

Received January 12, 2006
Revision received July 13, 2007
Accepted July 18, 2007 䡲

E-Mail Notification of Your Latest Issue Online!
Would you like to know when the next issue of your favorite APA journal will be available
online? This service is now available to you. Sign up at http://notify.apa.org/ and you will be
notified by e-mail when issues of interest to you become available!

