Journal of Personality and Social Psychology
2008, Vol. 94, No. 4, 579 –599

Copyright 2008 by the American Psychological Association
0022-3514/08/$12.00 DOI: 10.1037/0022-3514.94.4.579

The Effect of Global Versus Local Processing Styles on Assimilation
Versus Contrast in Social Judgment
Jens Förster

Nira Liberman

Universiteit van Amsterdam

Tel Aviv University

Stefanie Kuschel
Jacobs University Bremen
The authors propose a global/local processing style model (GLOMO) for assimilation and contrast effects
in social judgment. GLOMO is based on Schwarz and Bless’ (1992, 2007) inclusion– exclusion model,
which suggests that when information is included into a category, assimilation occurs, whereas when
information is excluded from a category, contrast occurs. According to GLOMO, inclusion versus
exclusion should be influenced by whether people process information globally or locally. In 5
experiments, using both disambiguation and social comparison, the authors induced local versus global
processing through perceptual tasks and time perspective and showed that global processing produced
assimilation, whereas local processing produced contrast. The experiments showed that processing styles
elicited in one task can carry over to other tasks and influence social judgments. Furthermore, they found
that hemisphere activation and accessibility of judgment-consistent knowledge partially mediated these
effects. Implications for current and classic models of social judgment are discussed.
Keywords: assimilation and contrast; exclusion versus inclusion; processing styles

of ambiguous behaviors (e.g., thinking about crossing the Atlantic
in a sailboat) that could be regarded as adventurous or reckless.
Participants then reported their impressions of Donald. Results
indicated that Donald was rated as more adventurous and less
reckless by the positively primed group than by the negatively
primed group. Soon after the classic demonstration of assimilation
after priming, examples of contrast followed (see Herr, Sherman,
& Fazio, 1983; Lombardi, Higgins, & Bargh, 1987),1 whereby the
target is perceived in a way that is opposite to the prime. The
question of whether assimilation or contrast would occur after
priming became one of central importance to research on social
cognition.
Many of the proposed accounts of assimilation versus contrast,
our model included, derive from Schwarz and Bless’ (1992; 2007)
inclusion– exclusion model (IEM), whose integrative role has
been, in our opinion, underacknowledged in the past. In the present
article, we review the basic assumptions of IEM, review other
models of assimilation and contrast, and then present and test a
new model, GLOMO (GLObal vs. LOcal processing Model),
which introduces a process distinction between assimilation and
contrast. Specifically, we propose that global processing leads to
inclusion and assimilation, whereas local processing leads to exclusion and contrast.

When primed with a concept (e.g., the word hostile), people
might assimilate further social judgments to the prime (e.g., judge
a target as more hostile than without the prime), or contrast them
away from the prime (e.g., judge the same target as less hostile). In
a classic demonstration of assimilation, Higgins, Rholes, and Jones
(1977) invited participants to an experiment that consisted of two
apparently unrelated studies. The first study was an alleged verbal
learning task, in which participants had to memorize either positive
words (adventurous, self-confident, independent, persistent) or
negative words (reckless, conceited, aloof, stubborn). The second
study was an impression formation task, in which participants read
a description of a character named Donald who performed a series

Jens Förster, Universiteit van Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands; Nira Liberman, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel; Stefanie
Kuschel, Jacobs University Bremen, Bremen, Germany.
This research was supported Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft Grant
FO-244/6-3 to Jens Förster and was conducted at Jacobs University Bremen, formerly know as International University Bremen.
We would like to thank Aga Bojarska, Alexandra Vulpe, Anna Rebecca
Sukkau, Basia Pietrawska, Elena Tsankova, Gosia Skorek, Hana Fleissigova, Inga Schulte-Bahrenberg, Kira Grabner, Konstantin Mihov, Laura
Dannenberg, Maria Kordonowska, Nika Yugay, Regina Bode, Rodica
Damian, Rytis Vitkauskas, and Sarah Horn, who served as experimenters.
Special thanks to Markus Denzler, Amina Özelsel, and Katrin Schimmel
for invaluable discussions. We thank Sarah Horn and Konstantin Mihov for
editing the article.
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Nira
Liberman, Department of Psychology, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv
69978, Israel, or to Jens Förster, Department of Social Psychology, Universiteit van Amsterdam, Roetersstraat 15, Amsterdam 1018 WB, The
Netherlands. E-mail: niralib@post.tau.ac.il or j.a.forster@uva.nl

1
We would like to distinguish contrast that is due to anchoring from
contrast that is due to judged unusability. Our article refers to the former.
In judged unusability, participants regard the influence of the prime as
inappropriate or undesirable and thus attempt to correct for its influence.
Anchoring, on the other hand, reflects using the prime as a standard and
contrasting away from it (for a further discussion of this distinction, see
DeCoster & Claypool, 2004; Förster & Liberman, in press).

579

580

FÖRSTER, LIBERMAN, AND KUSCHEL

The Inclusion–Exclusion Integrative Account of
Assimilation Versus Contrast
Schwarz and Bless’ (1992, 2007) IEM account proposes that
assimilation and contrast effects are a function of the mental
construal of targets and standards: Both constructions are based on
what is accessible at the time of the judgment. Assimilation occurs
when the target is included in the prime, whereas contrast occurs
when the target is excluded from the prime. As an aid to understanding the intuition behind IEM, it might be useful to visualize
the prime and the target as two blots and to think of the question
of assimilation versus contrast as whether the two blots are seen as
one blot or two distinct blots. Fuzzier boundaries of either of the
blots and a shorter distance between them would promote assimilation, whereas stronger boundaries and greater distance would
lead to contrast.
Closeness and similarity of the target to the prime suggest that
they belong to the same category and therefore increase the likelihood of inclusion. Contrary to that, extreme primes are, by
definition, more remote from the target and are thus more likely to
be excluded and to lead to contrast than are moderate primes.
Supporting this notion, Stapel and Koomen (2000, 2001; see also
Stapel & Suls, 2004) showed that close, highly relevant, similar,
and indistinct standards lead to assimilation rather than contrast. In
a similar vein, Mussweiler and Bodenhausen (2002) found that in
self-perception, psychologically proximal standards (e.g., members of the ingroup) are more likely to lead to assimilation than
psychologically distant targets. Using a modified version of the
priming paradigm by Higgins et al. (1977), Herr et al. (1983)
primed participants with moderate versus extreme exemplars of
animals in terms of ferocity and size and then asked the participants to judge the ferocity and size of a fictitious animal. Assimilation was found after moderate exemplar priming, whereas contrast was found after extreme exemplar priming (see also Herr,
1986; Mussweiler, Rüter, & Epstude, 2004).
Generally, a distal, more general perspective on both the prime
and the target is likely to make them seem close to each other and
thus lead to assimilation, whereas a close, detailed look is likely to
produce a contrast. This concept has implications, for example, for
the use of response scales. To illustrate, a subjective scale is likely
to be adjusted to the range of the judged set of stimuli (Parducci,
1965; Parducci, Perrett, & Marsh, 1969): in our case, the standard
and the target. If people focused on the prime and the target, a
contrast would be likely, as these two stimuli would be visualized
as being at a distance from each other. For example, if asked “How
much alcohol do you drink” and presented with a scale anchored
with the terms a lot and very little, a person who had been primed
with “drinking 3 nights per month” (a low standard of comparison)
may use the standard as the scale anchor (i.e., assume that 3 nights
a month is at the end marked very little) and contrast herself away
from the anchor. An objective scale, on the other hand, is more
likely to cover a wider range than the distance between the standard and the target and thus places them closer to each other than
when only these two stimuli are examined. For example, a scale
that ranges between three drinks a day and one drink a month
places the person closer to 3 nights per month if she drinks less
than 3 drinks a day. Assimilation should be the result. Consistent
with this logic, Mussweiler and Strack (2000) showed that priming
people with moderate standards of drug consumption leads to

assimilation on an objective scale (e.g., indicating the number of
times per month one consumes drugs) and a tendency toward
contrast on a subjective scale (e.g., indicating how extensive one’s
drug consumption is).
Another moderator of assimilation versus contrast in IEM
should be the fuzziness of the boundaries of the prime and the
targets, with fuzzy and more permeable boundaries producing
more assimilation. One may argue, for example, that exemplars
have clearer boundaries than do categories. Indeed, Stapel and
Koomen (1998) argued that priming of exemplars produces contrast, whereas priming of traits or categories causes assimilation.
Consistently, in a series of studies, they found assimilation after
they primed participants with sentences related to dependency.
Participants who had been primed judged a target person to be
more dependent than did the nonprimed control group. In contrast,
participants who read about Linda, a dependent person, and thus
were primed with an exemplar, rated the same target as less
dependent than did the nonprimed control group, reflecting a
contrast effect.2

Process Models of Assimilation Versus Contrast and
Their Relation to IEM: Interpretation Versus Comparison,
Selective Activation, and Reflection Versus Evaluation
Several more models were derived from IEM, identifying specific processes or processing goals that are likely to yield assimilation or contrast effects. For example, in their interpretation–
comparison model (ICM) of social comparison, Stapel and
Koomen (2000, 2001; see also Stapel & Suls, 2004, and for a
related view, Blanton, 2001) proposed a distinction between an
interpretation mindset, in which people try to make sense of a
target, and a comparison mindset, in which people compare a
target to a standard. They suggested that the former produces
assimilation, whereas the latter, if the standard is sufficiently
extreme, produces contrast. To test their proposal, Stapel and
Koomen (2001) primed participants with mindsets of interpretation (e.g., priming comprehend or interpret) versus comparison
(e.g., priming compare or differ) and demonstrated assimilation
after the former and contrast after the latter.
It is easy to see that an interpretation processing goal or mindset
leads to inclusion because one has to integrate the presented
2

In this article, we decided to focus on anchoring rather than judged
usability or more conscious contrast effects. However, we would like to
mention that generally, awareness of the primes helps to define the boundaries between the prime and the target. People may decide that an “aware”
prime is irrelevant to the question (or category) at hand and thus exclude
it, whereas with an “unaware” prime, people do not know the source (i.e.,
the boundary) of the activation, and judgments about its irrelevance are less
likely. If the prime is close enough to the target, an illusion is created that
activation is caused by the target and is therefore relevant. In line with this
logic, an early account of assimilation and contrast effects (Lombardi et al.,
1987) suggested that aware primes produce contrast, whereas unaware
primes produce assimilation (see also Higgins, 1996). As mentioned before, however, recent research showed that even unaware primes can lead
to contrast effects by means of unconscious standard use of the prime.
Thus, even though the general notion that aware primes might enhance
contrast and exclusion is correct and might be incorporated in an IEM
model, it is important to mention that awareness of the prime is not
necessary to produce contrast effects in social judgment.

EFFECT OF PROCESSING STYLE ON SOCIAL JUDGMENT

information into an existing knowledge structure. Comparison,
however, naturally involves juxtaposition (i.e., construal of the
standard as distinct from the target) and thus fosters exclusion.
Interpretation and comparison thus produce assimilation versus
contrast through induction of inclusion versus exclusion.
Another account that focuses on the comparison processes is the
selective activation model (SAM) proposed by Mussweiler and
Strack (2000; see also Mussweiler, 2003; Strack & Mussweiler,
1997). This model focuses on the integration of knowledge that is
made accessible by the comparison process. During the comparison phase, people form a hypothesis and search for hypothesisconsistent information. For example, in comparing her athletic
abilities with an extremely athletic standard, a person might try to
examine the hypothesis “I am not athletic” and search her memory
for confirming factual information (e.g., situations in which she
was lazy). Using lexical decision tasks, Mussweiler and Strack
(2000) found activation of different selective information patterns
(e.g., faster lexical decision for words related to athletic or unathletic) when people were exposed to high versus low standards. To
demonstrate the underlying process of similarity search implicated
in the SAM account, Mussweiler (2001) induced similarity or
dissimilarity search in an unrelated task prior to exposure to
moderate standards. Those who had been induced to search for
dissimilarities by a prior task exhibited judgments contrasting from
the standard, whereas those who had searched for similarities
exhibited assimilation. As with ICM, it is easy to see how SAM is
related to IEM. Searching for similarities between a prime and a
target leads to inclusion of the prime and the target in the same
category, whereas searching for dissimilarities leads to exclusion.
Recently, Markman and McMullen (2003) suggested a model of
assimilation versus contrast in comparative thinking: the reflective
versus evaluative model (REM). REM explicitly incorporates
inclusion– exclusion processes. Specifically, it proposes that inclusion instigates reflection, which involves experiential thinking and
simulating a state of the world in which the standard is true (e.g.,
in comparing himself to Einstein, an individual imagines being as
smart as Einstein and simulates this state of affairs) and leads to
assimilation. Exclusion, on the other hand, instigates evaluation, in
which the standard and the target are considered separately and the
target is compared with the standard, resulting in a contrast (see
Epstein, Lipson, Holstein, & Huh, 1992, for a related view). REM
assumes that the reflective thinking is based on simulation rather
than on activation of stored semantic knowledge (as is assumed in
SAM) and thus may explain assimilation in situations when no
immediately relevant factual knowledge exists. For example, people who almost boarded a doomed plane and feel bad about it do
not recall similar instances, but they may nevertheless imagine or
simulate that situation. In REM, reflection is an open-ended,
generative process, which renders accessibility less selective and
less dependent on stored memories than the search for standardconsistent knowledge in SAM.
In sum, many of the moderators of assimilation versus contrast
discussed in the literature, both stimuli and processes, may be
integrated into the general framework of the IEM. As Schwarz and
Bless noted in their recent review of IEM (2007), “It is the
diversity of these variables rather than the diversity of the underlying processes that results in the richness of empirical research
into assimilation and contrast effects” (p. 124).

581

We would like to suggest that the inclusion of information and
the search for similarities between the prime and the target are
enhanced by global processing, whereas the exclusion of information and the search for differences between the prime and the target
are enhanced by local processing. We thus add yet another moderator to the long list of inclusion– exclusion–related moderators of
assimilation versus contrast. We think, however, that such addition
is justified not only because global versus local processing cannot
be reduced to other moderators but also because it is a basic
distinction that has many psychological ramifications. For example, global processing has been shown to be associated with
psychological distance (Liberman, Trope, & Stephan, 2007), creative thought (Friedman, Fishbach, Förster, & Werth, 2003), a
promotion focus on ideals (Förster & Higgins, 2005), positive
moods (Gasper & Clore, 2002), interdependent selves (Kühnen &
Oyserman, 2002), and right hemispheric activation (Derryberry &
Tucker, 1994) as well as lower levels of obsessionality (Yovel,
Revelle & Mineka, 2005), and lower levels of anxiety (Mikulincer,
Kedem, & Paz, 1990; Mikulincer, Paz, & Kedem, 1990), to name
a few. If assimilation versus contrast is related to global versus
local processing, then it should also be related to these variables.
Because of that, we believe that our model paves the way to
considering assimilation versus contrast processes in a broad psychological context. We now elaborate on global and local processing and their suggested relation to assimilation versus contrast.

Global Versus Local Processing
The distinction between global and local processing originates
in cognitive psychology with the classic study by Navon (1977). In
order to test the hypothesis that people tend to first look at the
gestalt rather than at the details of a structure (i.e., the global
precedence hypothesis), Navon presented participants with large
letters (global characters) that were formed with small letters (local
characters) and asked them whether a target letter was present on
the screen. He found a global dominance effect, showing that, in
general, participants’ decisions were faster when the target
matched the global letters than when it matched the local letters.
Simple as it seems, the distinction between global and local processing proved to be of importance in cognitive, clinical, and
social psychology (Delis, Robertson, & Efron, 1986; Fink et al.,
1996; Förster & Higgins, 2005; Gasper & Clore, 2002; Kühnen &
Oyserman, 2002; Lamb & Robertson, 1990; Liberman, Trope, &
Stephan, 2007). How are these processing styles related to inclusion and exclusion processes?

Global Versus Local Model of Inclusion Versus
Exclusion
We need to go one step back in order to relate perceptual
processing styles to conceptual tasks, like the task of forming
judgments in relation to a comparison standard. How is perceptual
processing related to conceptual tasks? According to prominent
views in cognitive psychology, high-level cognition is connected
to and derives from perception (Barsalou, 1999; Finke, 1985;
Gilbert, 1991; Masson, 1995). Prominently, Tucker and his colleagues (Tucker & Williamson, 1984; see also, Derryberry &
Reed, 1998; Derryberry & Tucker, 1994; Luu, Tucker, & Derryberry, 1998) suggested that perceptual scope is closely related to

582

FÖRSTER, LIBERMAN, AND KUSCHEL

conceptual scope. More specifically, they suggested that the attentional selection of stored mental representations in long-term
memory (conceptual scope) is related to the selection of sensorybased percepts (perceptual scope, see Anderson & Neely, 1996;
Derryberry & Reed, 1998; Derryberry & Tucker, 1994; Luu et al.,
1998).
Borrowing this notion, Friedman et al. (2003) reasoned that
procedurally priming a perception on the gestalt of objects (e.g.,
city maps) would translate into activation of abstract concepts in
memory and thus enhance the generation of unusual objects in an
allegedly unrelated test phase. In an experiment, they showed that
participants who underwent a global processing manipulation (i.e.,
being instructed to look at the entire gestalt of a city map) outperformed those who underwent a local processing manipulation (i.e.,
being instructed to look at the details of the same city map) when
asked to generate the most unusual exemplar they could think of
for a number of categories (e.g., birds, colors, fruits, and so on; see
also Förster, Friedman, Özelsel, & Denzler, 2006). Presumably,
local perception narrowed participants’ conceptual attention,
which in turn impaired their creative thinking (Ward, 1995). Notably, the priming phase and the test phase did not overlap in
content, so that the effect of the priming on the performance in the
creativity task has to be attributed to a process influence rather
than a content influence.
Such processing style should also trigger inclusion. To include
an exemplar into a category requires one to broaden the conceptual
scope (by activating more abstract representations; Isen & Daubman, 1984). For example, consider the question, “Is a camel a
vehicle?” One may think of a camel as a means to move from one
place to another, which is similar to what a car or a bus does. On
the contrary, exclusion involves focusing on concrete details that
make the exemplar sufficiently distinct from typical members of
the particular category. Deciding that a camel is not a vehicle
involves noticing distinct features that do not fit the category, for
instance, that a camel does not have wheels (see Friedman &
Förster, 2002). It involves the construction of a narrow category
(i.e., that vehicles have wheels). The results of Friedman et al.’s
(2003) experiment in which participants after global priming generated more unusual exemplars could thus be based on an inclusion
process of more remote information.
Global versus local processing may be related not only to
inclusion versus exclusion but also to closely related processes,
such as searching for similarities versus dissimilarities. For example, Förster (2007a) asked participants to look at a series of Navon
letters (Navon, 1977) and then asked some participants to name the
big letters (global priming condition) and some to name the small
letters (local priming condition; see Förster & Higgins, 2005;
Macrae & Lewis, 2002). Then, in an ostensibly unrelated task,
participants searched for similarities or differences between pictures of flower bunches (Markman & Gentner, 1996). As predicted, after global priming, participants found more similarities
than dissimilarities, whereas after local priming, the reverse was
true. To sum up, global versus local processing could trigger
further processes highly relevant for the development of assimilation or contrast effects, such as inclusion or exclusion and similarity search.
We will come back to the discussion of how GLOMO is
different from other models of assimilation versus contrast in the
General Discussion section, after we have presented the results of

our experiments. For now, we would like to point out that looking
at global versus local processing as a potential moderator of
assimilation versus contrast offers a possible way to integrate
processes of assimilation and contrast to novel psychological phenomena. On the empirical side, it allows the prediction that perceptual scope of attention, as activated by the Navon (1977) task
or the map task (Friedman et al., 2003), affects assimilation versus
contrast. On the theoretical side, it allows the connection to known
antecedents and mediators of scope of processing. Of these, in the
present article, we chose to examine psychological distance (which
was related to more global processing in construal level theory,
Liberman, Trope, & Stephan, 2007) and asymmetry in hemispheric
activation (which Derryberry & Tucker, 1994, and Tucker &
Williamson, 1984, related to global versus local processing).

Overview of the Experiments
In our experiments, we induced global versus local processing
by the aforementioned map task (in Experiment 1; Friedman et al.,
2003), the Navon task (in Experiments 2, 4, and 5; Macrae &
Lewis, 2002), or introduction of varying temporal distances (Experiment 4; Liberman & Trope, 1998). For all paradigms, we
expected the elicited processing styles to be shifted to the subsequent judgment phase (see Dodson, Johnson, & Schooler, 1997;
Schooler, 2002).
In Experiment 1, we replicated the classic experiment by Srull
and Wyer (1979) on impression formation, in which participants
were primed with aggression-related or control words and then
were asked to rate the aggressiveness of an ambiguously aggressive target person. Before the semantic priming, we induced either
global or local processing. We expected higher aggressiveness
ratings (i.e., more assimilation) after global processing than after
local processing. Because most of the moderators of assimilation
versus contrast were tested within this context of social comparison, in all subsequent experiments, we tested our hypotheses
within this context. Thus, in Experiments 2–5, participants were
asked to compare themselves either to high or to low standards. In
addition to inducing global versus local processing, we also manipulated extremity of standards in Experiment 4 and introduced a
lexical decision task to examine whether global versus local processing selectively activated standard-consistent versus standardinconsistent information. In Experiment 5, we attempted to find
initial evidence for hemispheric activation mediating assimilation
or contrast effects.

Experiment 1: Global Versus Local Processing and
Assimilation Versus Contrast in a Classic Impression
Formation Paradigm
Method
Participants
Participants were 88 undergraduate students (60 women, 28
men) from 52 different nations majoring in different disciplines at
the Jacobs University Bremen (formerly known as International
University Bremen) in Germany. The study was conducted in
English during their “Introduction to Social Psychology” class.
Participants were randomly assigned to experimental conditions.

EFFECT OF PROCESSING STYLE ON SOCIAL JUDGMENT

Six students chose to not take part in the experiment. There were
no gender differences in any of the results reported.

Materials
Induction of processing style. We induced global versus local
processing in a way similar to the procedure used by Friedman et
al. (2003). Specifically, a map of the inner city of Oldenburg,
Germany, was projected on the screen of the lecture hall, and
participants were asked to examine it for 3 min. In the global
processing condition, participants were asked to look at the map as
a whole so that they could answer later questions about the overall
shape of the map. In the local processing condition, participants
were asked to look at the details of the map so that they could
answer later questions about them. In the control condition, participants were asked to focus on both details and shape.
Semantic priming. The priming manipulation consisted of a
word-search puzzle similar to the one used by Bargh and Gollwitzer (1994) and Mussweiler and Förster (2000). In particular, we
used two word-search puzzles, 19 letters ⫻ 17 letters, each with 12
words that were arranged horizontally and vertically. All 12 words
were listed on the right-hand side of the letter matrix. Both puzzles
included 6 words that were neutral with respect to aggression
(board, radio, roof, clock, newspaper, bread). The neutral puzzle
included another 6 neutral words (teapot, colorful, calendar,
barge, chair, cup) and the aggression puzzle included 6
aggression-related words (violence, hatred, brutal, murder, attack,
malicious) that were successfully used in other studies (e.g., Mussweiler & Förster, 2000).
For our main dependent variable, we made use of Srull &
Wyer’s (1979) person perception task. In this task, participants
read a paragraph about John, who is described as performing a
number of ambiguously aggressive behaviors (e.g., denying a
salesman entry into the apartment, refusing to pay rent until the
landlord repainted the apartment). Previous research has shown
that this paragraph is ambiguous with respect to its evaluative
implications, as the target person may be perceived as either
aggressive or assertive (e.g., Srull & Wyer, 1979; 1980). Participants then rated the target person on 10 bipolar scales, which
ranged from 1 to 9, with endpoints labeled with antagonistic traits.
The endpoints of the 2 critical scales, which appeared in the fifth
and the eighth positions on the list, were labeled assertive– hostile
and determined– belligerent. These 2 scales appeared along with 8
irrelevant scales (e.g., with endpoints labeled self-confident–
arrogant, cowardly– cautious). The order of the traits was constant.

Procedure
Participants of an “Introduction to Social Psychology” class
were asked to participate in an experimental session. The instructor
announced a class demonstration of three different experiments on
different psychological questions. He said that students were welcome to participate but could also choose not to participate. Participants were given four different folders. The first folder contained the general instructions. Here, participants were informed
that they were about to take part in three separate studies, one on
geographic abilities, one on cognitive performance, and one on
person perception. It was pointed out that the three studies were

583

unrelated and were administered together solely for efficiency
reasons. The materials were printed in different fonts and on
different types of paper.
The second folder contained the alleged geographic abilities
task to induce a global versus local processing style. Participants
were asked to focus on a map of the city of Oldenburg that was
projected on the screen of the lecture hall. One third of the
participants were instructed to attend to the global shape, one third
to attend to the local details, and one third was asked to attend to
both the details and shape of the map. After 3 min of observing the
map, the participants were asked to answer a questionnaire concerning the map that was intended to render credibility to the cover
story but was not analyzed
The third folder contained the semantic priming task, which was
introduced as a pretest of materials that would later be used to
examine cognitive performance. About half of the participants
received the puzzle containing aggression-related words, whereas
the other half received a puzzle containing no aggression-related
words. Participants had 2 min to do the task, which none of the
participants completed. We did this because a former study
showed that priming effects are more likely to be effective if the
priming task is interrupted (Förster, Liberman, & Higgins, 2005;
Liberman, Förster, & Higgins, 2007; Martin, 1986).
The fourth folder contained the third impression formation task.
Participants were informed that the purpose of the third study was
to pretest materials for a study on social perception. They were
asked to read the description of John and to rate him on the 10
bipolar scales.
A final set of questions examined participants’ awareness of the
actual purpose of the study, which was discovered by none of
them. After completing the tasks in the folders, participants were
thanked and debriefed. A class discussion revealed that no one felt
that one task influenced the next and that participants enjoyed
taking part in the study. In sum, Experiment 1 was based on a 3
(processing: global vs. local vs. control) ⫻ 2 (semantic priming:
aggression vs. no aggression) between-participants factorial design.

Results
We averaged the two aggressiveness items (r ⫽ .63) to arrive at
an aggressiveness score and submitted it to a 3 (processing: global
vs. local vs. control) ⫻ 2 (semantic priming: aggression vs. no
aggression) between-participants analysis of variance (ANOVA).
The analysis revealed that, as can be seen in Table 1, participants
primed with aggression judged the target person to be more aggressive (M ⫽ 5.06, SD ⫽ 1.96) than those not primed with
aggression (M ⫽ 4.35, SD ⫽ 1.20), F(1, 76) ⫽ 5.96, p ⫽ .017.
Moreover, participants in the global processing condition gave
higher aggressiveness ratings (M ⫽ 5.43, SD ⫽ 1.71) than those in
the control (M ⫽ 5.04, SD ⫽ 1.40) or the local (M ⫽ 3.70, SD ⫽
1.44) processing condition, F(2, 76) ⫽ 13.13, p ⬍ .0001. Most
important, these two main effects were qualified by the predicted
interaction, F(2, 76) ⫽ 21.57, p ⬍ .0001, showing that processing
style affected the impact of the prime. Results reflected an assimilation effect in the control processing condition; that is, participants judged the target person to be more aggressive after aggression priming (M ⫽ 5.63, SD ⫽ 1.25) than after nonaggression
priming (M ⫽ 4.29, SD ⫽ 1.23), t(25) ⫽ 2.79, p ⫽ .01. This

FÖRSTER, LIBERMAN, AND KUSCHEL

584

Table 1
Experiment I: Mean Ratings (and Standard Deviations) of Aggressiveness and Traits Unrelated
to Aggressiveness as a Function of Induced Processing Style and Semantic Priming
Induced processing style
Local
Measure
Rating of aggression
Semantic priming of aggression
Semantic priming of neutral words
Rating of unrelated traits
Semantic priming of aggression
Semantic priming of neutral words

Control

Global

M

SD

M

SD

M

SD

2.86
4.62

1.15
1.16

5.63
4.29

1.25
1.23

6.53
4.15

1.21
1.25

4.72
4.41

0.43
0.40

4.43
4.53

0.44
0.45

4.58
4.64

0.67
0.49

assimilative effect was somewhat more pronounced in the global
processing condition compared with the control processing condition (Maggression ⫽ 6.53, SD ⫽1.21; Mno aggression ⫽ 4.15, SD
⫽1.25), t(26) ⫽ 5.10, p ⬍ .0001. Yet, in the local processing
condition, as predicted, a contrast effect occurred: Participants
judged the target person to be less aggressive after aggression
priming (M ⫽ 2.86, SD ⫽ 1.15) than after nonaggression priming
(M ⫽ 4.62; SD ⫽ 1.16), t(25) ⫽ 3.96, p ⬍ .001. There were no
effects of the experimental manipulation on any of the other
judgment scales, Fs ⬍ 1.4, ns.
We further examined whether aggressiveness ratings differed
between the processing groups with two separate one-way
ANOVAs for the aggression and the nonaggression priming
groups. In the nonprimed groups, processing did not yield any
significant effects, Fs ⬍ 1. In the primed groups, the analysis was
significant, F(2, 41) ⫽ 36, p ⬍ .0001, as were all contrasts
between processing conditions. Both the local processing condition, t(41) ⫽ 6.19; p ⬍ .0001, and the global processing condition,
t(41) ⫽ 2.04; p ⫽ .05, differed significantly from the control
condition.
To sum up, the experiment showed a significant moderation of
processing style on the effects of semantic priming on person
perception. Whereas global processing relative to control processing (i.e., participants focused on both details and shape of the map)
intensified assimilation to the prime, local processing produced a
significant contrast.
In the following experiments, we further examined the impact of
processing styles on assimilation and contrast but turned to social
comparison paradigms. Recently, research on social comparison
has uncovered a multitude of moderators of assimilation versus
contrast effects, including extremity of the comparison standard
and use of objective versus subjective scales. We examined the
effect of processing styles on assimilation versus contrast in the
context of both of these variables.

Experiment 2: Global Versus Local Processing, Moderate
Standards, and Subjective Versus Objective Scales
In this experiment, we induced global versus local processing by
making participants attend to either large or small letters, respectively. In an allegedly unrelated task, they were asked to compare

their own alcohol consumption with one of two celebrities who
constituted either a moderately high standard (the British pop
singer Robbie Williams) or a moderately low comparison standard
(the former tennis star Steffi Graf). Without prior activation of
processing styles, we expected participants to assimilate selfevaluations toward the moderate standards on the objective scale
and contrast away from the standards on the subjective scale, as
found by Mussweiler and Strack (2000). We expected global
processing to tilt the balance toward assimilation and local processing to tilt the balance toward contrast. We also wanted to
examine whether global versus local processing would override
the effect of subjective versus objective scales, so that after local
processing there would be a contrast effect on both scales, whereas
after global processing there would be an assimilation effect on
both scales.
Mussweiler and Strack’s (2000) SAM explains the effect of
scale type by suggesting that with objective scales, accessible
knowledge affects judgment, whereas subjective scales are used
as a reference point to anchor the judgment of comparison.
Biernat and Manis’s (2007) model on stereotypes also predicts
assimilation on objective scales and contrast on subjective
scales. According to the authors, this occurs because objective
scales evoke comparison to the entire population, and information about the group is used to interpret the target (e.g., “She is
a woman; therefore, she probably has high verbal skills”).
Contrary to that, subjective scales evoke more local comparisons within the group (e.g., “For a woman, her verbal skills are
not that high”).
As mentioned before, we hypothesized, in line with IEM, that
subjective scales would enhance contrast because the target and
the standard are used to define the range of the scale on which they
obviously occupy opposite ends. We believed, however, that if one
took enough of a global perspective, then a value range wider than
that defined by the target and the standard might be considered,
thus allowing for inclusion and assimilation. We also thought that
it might be possible that a local perspective would narrow the
range of values around the target and the standard, and would thus
produce exclusion and contrast, even with objective scales. Thus,
we thought that both types of scales might produce both assimilation, if processed globally, and contrast, if processed locally. The
next study examined these predictions.

EFFECT OF PROCESSING STYLE ON SOCIAL JUDGMENT

Method
Participants
Participants were 124 undergraduate students (62 women, 62
men) at the University of Bremen majoring in disciplines other
than psychology who were recruited for an experimental session
described as consisting of diverse psychological tests. Participants
were randomly assigned to conditions, tested in groups of up to 3
in sessions lasting approximately 2 hr, and paid 16 euros for
participation.

Materials
We conducted a pretest to examine common attitudes about
drug consumption among a number of rock, pop, and hip hop
singers, and selected the British pop singer Robbie Williams, a
well known celebrity in Germany, as our moderately high standard
of drug consumption.3 We conducted yet another pretest in which
a different group of 20 participants estimated how often they and
a number of celebrities engaged in a variety of behaviors. The
critical questions pertained to the number of times the targets
consumed drugs and alcohol within 1 month. On average, participants reported consuming drugs and alcohol about 10 times a
month. Participants estimated that Robbie Williams (the high
standard) consumes drugs and alcohol about 20 times a month,
whereas Steffi Graf (the low standard) consumes drugs and alcohol
about once to twice a month.
There were three questions about drug and alcohol consumption,
gauging comparative, objective, and subjective estimates. One
third of the participants were first asked whether they consumed
drugs, including alcohol, more or less often than Robbie Williams
(i.e., the high standard). The other third were asked whether they
consumed drugs and alcohol more or less often than Steffi Graf
(i.e., the low standard). One third of the participants did not answer
a comparative question. In the subsequent objective judgment, all
the participants were asked to estimate the number of times they
consumed drugs and alcohol per month. Finally, using a rating
scale that ranged from 1 (not at all extensive) to 9 (very extensive),
all the participants indicated how extensive their drug and alcohol
consumption was.

Procedure
Upon arrival of the participants, the experimenter handed out the
materials of the two studies and pointed out that they were unrelated to each other and were administered together for efficiency
reasons. Participants first completed the global–local processing
task (Navon, 1977), which was administered on a computer and
which presented a series of global letters (2.5 cm ⫻ 2.5 cm) that
were formed with local letters (0.5 cm ⫻ 0.5 cm; i.e., each
horizontal or vertical line making up a global letter was formed
with five closely spaced local letters). On each trial, participants
were first presented with a fixation cross (⫹) in the center of the
screen for 500 ms. Then, one of eight global composite letters was
randomly presented, and participants were instructed to press a
blue response key if the stimulus contained the letter L and to press
a red response key if the stimulus contained the letter H. They were
asked to respond as quickly as possible. The task was set up so that
by random assignment, one third of the participants always had to

585

detect a global letter (global processing condition), one third of the
participants always had to detect a local letter (local processing
condition), and one third of the participants had to detect global
and local letters equally often (control processing condition). More
specifically, in the global processing condition, each set of composite letters included eight global targets (an H made of Fs, an H
made of Ts, an L made of Ts, and an L made of Fs) and no local
targets, whereas in the local processing condition, each set included eight local targets (an F made of Hs, an F made of Ls, a T
made of Hs, and a T made of Ls) and no global targets. In the
control processing condition, four of the composite letters included
global targets (an H made of Fs, an H made of Ts, an L made of
Ts, and an L made of Fs) and four local targets (an F made of Hs,
an F made of Ls, a T made of Hs, and a T made of Ls). Participants
worked on a total of eight sets of composite letters: 48 global, 48
local, or 24 global and local trials each.
Participants then received a folder with instructions on the social
comparison task, modeled after the task used by Mussweiler
(2001) and Mussweiler and Strack (2000). Participants were first
informed that the purpose of this study was to pretest materials for
future studies on self-evaluation. They were told that in order to
obtain normative data for these studies, the experimenter would
ask them a number of questions about drug consumption. Participants were told that before evaluating themselves, they would
compare themselves to a celebrity: They were asked to bring this
person to mind and to compare themselves with this person with
respect to drug and alcohol consumption. Participants were encouraged to take some time to make this comparison. To ensure
that participants did indeed engage in the respective comparisons,
the experimenter asked them to indicate how difficult it was for
them to make the comparison, using a scale ranging from 1 (very
easy) to 9 (very difficult). There were no differences in experienced
difficulty across conditions. Then, participants answered the two
critical questions, one subjective and one objective question assessing self-evaluations of drug and alcohol consumption. The
order of the two questions was counterbalanced and had no effects.
This procedure was similar to that of Mussweiler and Strack
(2000). After completion of the two tasks, participants were asked
to perform other unrelated tasks, fully debriefed after the entire
session, paid, and thanked for their participation. In sum, Experiment 2 was based on a 3 (processing: global vs. local vs. control) ⫻ 2 (standard: high vs. low) ⫻ 2 (scale: subjective vs.
objective) factorial design, with only the last factor manipulated
within participants.

Results
We expected to replicate Mussweiler and Strack’s (2000) findings in the control processing condition, in that participants would
assimilate evaluations of their alcohol and drug consumption toward the standards on the objective scale but would contrast it
away from the standard on the subjective scale. We also predicted
for both scales more assimilative effects and less contrastive
3
We aimed to replicate a study by Mussweiler and Strack (2000), who
used the musician Frank Zappa and tennis player Steffi Graf as comparison
standards. However, we learned in a different pretest that only 30% of the
tested sample knew who Frank Zappa was and 82% of them associated him
with an anti-drugs campaign.

FÖRSTER, LIBERMAN, AND KUSCHEL

586

effects after induction of global processing than after induction of
local processing. We wanted to examine whether global versus
local processing would override the effects of the type of scale, so
that no difference between objective and subjective scales would
be detected after activation of global versus local processing style.
To allow comparisons of subjective and objective scales, we
z-transformed all ratings (for means, see Table 2). We conducted
a 3 (processing: global vs. local vs. control) ⫻ 2 (standard:
moderately high vs. moderately low) ⫻ 2 (scale: objective vs.
subjective) ANOVA for mixed designs, which yielded two-way
interactions between scale and standard, F(1, 118) ⫽ 5.69, p ⬍
.02, and between processing and standard, F(2, 118) ⫽ 10.31, p ⬍
.0001. More important, the three-way interaction qualified these
interactions, F(2, 118) ⫽ 5.51, p ⫽ .005. There were no other
effects, Fs ⬍ 1.
The three-way interaction indicated that processing style affected the impact of standards differently for objective and subjective scales. More specifically, in the control processing condition, there was a tendency of a contrast effect on the subjective
scale (Mhigh ⫽ ⫺0.28, SD ⫽ 0.34, vs. Mlow ⫽ 0.12, SD ⫽ 1.49),
t(40) ⫽ 1.25, p ⫽ .12, and a marginal assimilation on the objective
scale (Mhigh ⫽ 0.07, SD ⫽ 0.79, vs. Mlow ⫽ ⫺0.45, SD ⫽ 0.98),
t(40) ⫽ ⫺1.87, p ⬍ .07. Assimilation effects were found after
global processing for both the objective scale (Mhigh ⫽ 0.66, SD ⫽
1.13, vs. Mlow ⫽ ⫺0.47, SD ⫽ 0.57), t(39) ⫽ 4.07, p ⬍ .0001, and
the subjective scale (Mhigh ⫽ 0.30, SD ⫽ 0.89, vs. Mlow ⫽ ⫺0.20,
SD ⫽ 0.66), t(39) ⫽ 2.06, p ⬍ .05). Contrary to this finding, in the
local processing condition, contrast effects were found for both the
objective scale (Mhigh ⫽ ⫺0.41, SD ⫽ 0.83, vs. Mlow ⫽ 0.60,
SD ⫽ 0.99), t(39) ⫽ 3.53, p ⬍ 001, and the subjective scale
(Mhigh ⫽ ⫺0.29, SD ⫽ 1.10, vs. Mlow ⫽ 0.36, SD ⫽ 1.07), t(39) ⫽
1.92, p ⫽ .06.
To sum up, in the control processing condition, we replicated
Mussweiler and Strack’s (2000) results, showing the expected
pattern, with assimilation on the objective scale and contrast on the
subjective scale; however, admittedly, assimilation versus contrast
was not statistically significant if two-tailed t tests were used.4
After global processing, however, assimilation occurred on both
scales, whereas after local processing, a contrast effect occurred on
both scales. It is possible that in the control conditions, global
versus local processing style affected ratings unsystematically. In
the experimental conditions, though, we bound variance by priming manipulations, and results confirmed our predictions.
Table 2
Experiment 2: Mean Z-Transformed Judgments (and Standard
Deviations) as a Function of Induced Processing Style, Scale,
and Standard
Induced processing style
Local
Measure
Subjective scale
High standard
Low standard
Objective scale
High standard
Low standard

Control

Global

M

SD

M

SD

M

SD

⫺0.29
0.36

1.10
1.07

⫺0.28
0.12

0.34
1.49

0.30
⫺0.20

0.89
0.66

⫺0.41
0.60

0.83
0.99

0.07
⫺0.45

0.79
0.98

0.66
⫺0.47

1.13
0.57

We think that this was the case because global processing
widened the scope of conceptual processing, allowing the inclusion of both the target and the standard of comparison in the same
category, whereas local processing narrowed conceptual scope,
fostering perception of the prime and the target as belonging to
different categories. In the next experiment, we aimed to replicate
the results with another induction of global versus local processing
style—temporal distance.

Experiment 3: Time Perspective, Moderate Standards, and
Subjective Versus Objective Scales
Construal level theory (Liberman, Trope, & Stephan, 2007;
Trope & Liberman, 2003) suggests that increasing a perceiver’s
psychological distance from a stimulus causes him or her to
construe that stimulus in a more abstract manner. Several lines of
research are consistent with this analysis. For example, Liberman,
Sagristano and Trope (2002, Study 1) found that temporal distance
influenced the way in which participants classified objects that
were part of future activities (e.g., a camping trip). The same set of
items (e.g., potato chips, boots, hot dogs, blanket) was classified
into fewer, broader categories when the items pertained to more
distant future activities. Related to this finding, Förster, Friedman,
and Liberman (2004) showed that temporal distance increased
performance in the Snowy Picture Test and in the Gestalt Completion Test, both of which require abstracting a global visual
image and ignoring local details that constitute noise. Conceptually
similar effects on abstraction and global processing have also been
found with other dimensions of psychological distance: spatial
distance (Fujita, Henderson, Trope, Eng, & Liberman, 2006; Henderson, Fujita, Trope, & Liberman, 2006), hypotheticality (Wakslak, Trope, & Liberman, 2006), and social distance (Stephan,
Liberman & Trope, 2007; see also Idson & Mischel, 2001). Recently, distancing has been shown to also affect performance on
the Navon task, increasing the efficiency of global perception and
decreasing local perception (Liberman & Förster, 2007). If our
reasoning is correct, we would expect temporal distance to increase the tendency for assimilation and inclusion and decrease the
tendency toward contrast and exclusion.
Participants in our experiment compared their athletic skills to
either a moderately high standard (race car driver Michael Schumacher) or a moderately low standard (former U.S. president Bill
Clinton) and then rated (on both an objective scale and a subjective
scale) their expected athletic performance in an athletic competition the day after or 1 year from the time of the experiment. In the
control condition, time was not specified. As in Experiment 2, we
expected that relative to the control condition, global processing
(induced by the distant time perspective) would enhance assimilation (and reduce contrast) and local processing (induced by the
4
Note that in the Mussweiler & Strack (2000) studies (Experiments 3
and 4), although the interactions between high versus low standard and
objective versus subjective scales were significant, contrasts were either
not reported (Study 4) or were tested with less conservative one-tailed t
tests (Study 3), which showed a significant assimilation effect for objective
scales, t(18)⫽ 2.53, p ⬍ .01, but only a marginal contrast effect for
subjective scales, t(18) ⫽ 2.53, p ⬍ .07 (both one tailed). Thus, even
though results seem to replicate across studies, the effects are potentially
weak.

EFFECT OF PROCESSING STYLE ON SOCIAL JUDGMENT

proximal time perspective) would enhance contrast (and reduce
assimilation) on both scales.

Method
Participants
Participants were 132 undergraduate students (72 women, 60
men) at the University of Bremen majoring in disciplines other
than psychology who were recruited for an experiment consisting
of diverse psychological tests. The experiment was conducted in
German at Jacobs University Bremen. Participants were randomly
assigned to conditions and were tested in groups of up to 3 in
sessions that lasted approximately 2 hr. Participants were paid 16
euros for their participation. Three participants had to be excluded
because they did not respond to all questions. Two other participants were excluded because of experimenter errors.

Procedure
After working on several unrelated tasks for approximately 60
min, participants received a folder with instructions on the social
comparison task, which was modeled after the task used by Mussweiler and Strack (2000) and Stapel and Suls (2004). Participants
were first informed that the study was a pretest of materials for
future studies on self-evaluation. They were further told that to
obtain normative data for these studies, the experimenter would
ask them a number of questions about their athletic abilities;
however, before evaluating themselves, they would be asked to
compare themselves with a celebrity: They were asked to bring
this person to mind and to compare themselves with this person
with respect to athletic abilities. Participants were encouraged to
take some time to make this comparison. They were either asked
to compare themselves to a moderate athletic standard (Michael
Schumacher)5 or to a moderately unathletic standard (Bill Clinton). To ensure that participants did indeed engage in the comparisons, we asked them to indicate how difficult it was for them to
make the comparisons on a scale ranging from 1 (very easy) to 9
(very difficult). There were no differences in experienced difficulty
across conditions.
Then, participants were instructed to imagine that they would
participate in an athletics competition the day after or 1 year from
the experiment; thus we manipulated proximal versus distal time
perspective, respectively. A control group was asked to imagine an
athletics competition without a time indicator. Participants then
answered questions on their athletic performance on that competition. Two questions introduced an objective scale: Participants
were asked to estimate the maximum number of knee bends and
push-ups they could do. The third question—“How athletic do you
think you are?”—introduced the subjective scale, which ranged
from 1 (not that athletic) to 9 (very athletic). Whether the objective
or subjective measure came first was counterbalanced and had no
effect on any of the results. In this experiment, we also controlled
for participants’ mood, since mood has been shown to affect global
versus local processing styles (see Gasper & Clore, 2002; for a
detailed discussion, see General Discussion). Temporal distance
may change moods. Specifically, it is possible that because people
tend to have a more positive view of the more distant future (e.g.,

587

Peterson, 2000; Weinstein, 1980), a distant time perspective would
enhance mood.
In order to control for possible mood effects, we asked participants to indicate how they felt at the moment on a scale ranging
from 1 (very bad) to 9 (very good). After some unrelated tasks,
participants were fully debriefed, paid, and thanked for their participation. In sum, Experiment 3 was based on a 3 (temporal
distance: distant future vs. near future vs. control) ⫻ 2 (standard:
high vs. low) ⫻ 2 (scale: objective vs. subjective) factorial design,
with only the last factor manipulated within participants.

Results
Similar to Experiment 2, answers on both objective and subjective scales were z-transformed. We conducted a 3 (temporal distance: distant future vs. near future vs. control) ⫻ 2 (standard:
moderately high vs. moderately low) ⫻ 2 (scale: objective vs.
subjective) ANOVA for mixed designs, which yielded two-way
interactions between scale and standard, F(1, 120) ⫽ 9.28, p ⫽
.003, and between time distance and standard, F(2, 120) ⫽ 29.55,
p ⬍ .0001. More important, the predicted three-way interaction
was also obtained, F(2, 120) ⫽ 4.51, p ⫽ .013. There were no
other effects, Fs ⬍ 1. To better understand the three-way interaction, we now turn to examine the assimilation and contrast effects
in each of the temporal distance conditions.
As can be seen in Table 3, the control condition revealed the
typical pattern of assimilation on objective scales (Mhigh ⫽ 0.36,
SD ⫽ 1.08, vs. Mlow ⫽ ⫺0.36, SD ⫽ 0.77), t(38) ⫽ 2.44; p ⬍ .02,
and contrast on subjective scales (Mhigh ⫽ ⫺0.25, SD ⫽ 0.85, vs.
Mlow ⫽ 0.25, SD ⫽ 1.01), t(38) ⫽ 1.60, p ⫽ .12. As we found in
Experiment 2, it seems that the general pattern of results described
in Mussweiler & Strack (2000) can be obtained; however, it was
difficult to obtain significant results with two-tailed t tests (see also
Footnote 4). Consistent with our predictions, in the distant future
condition, assimilation occurred on both the objective scale
(Mhigh ⫽ 0.56, SD ⫽ 1.04, vs. Mlow ⫽ ⫺0.58, SD ⫽ .51), t(41) ⫽
4.5, p ⬍ .0001, and the subjective scale (Mhigh ⫽ 0.64, SD ⫽ 0.75,
vs. Mlow ⫽ ⫺0.67, SD ⫽ 0.78), t(41) ⫽ 5.64, p ⬍ .0001. Also
consistent with our predictions, in the near future condition, contrast occurred on both the objective scale (Mhigh ⫽ ⫺0.35, SD ⫽
0.33, vs. Mlow ⫽ 0.36, SD ⫽ 1.29), t(41) ⫽ 2.53; p ⬍ .02, and the
subjective scale (Mhigh ⫽ ⫺0.71, SD ⫽ 0.72,vs. Mlow ⫽ 0.68,
SD ⫽ 0.72), t(41) ⫽ 6.30, p ⬍ .0001. Thus, as in Experiment 2, we
replicated Mussweiler and Strack’s (2000) results in the control
condition, with assimilation on the objective scale and contrast on
the subjective scale. In the distant future condition, however,
assimilation occurred on both scales, whereas in the near future
condition, a contrast effect occurred on both scales.
We examined whether mood mediated any of the obtained
results but found no differences between conditions in reported
mood, Fs ⬍ 1.5, ps ⬎ .23. In addition, when entered as a covariate,
mood had no effect and did not change the significance of the
5
We attempted to replicate the studies with race driver Niki Lauda, who
was used as a moderately high standard in Mussweiler and Strack’s (2000)
research, but only a few of our participants knew who he was. Thus, we
conducted pretests and identified race driver Michael Schumacher as a
moderately high standard with respect to athletic abilities.

FÖRSTER, LIBERMAN, AND KUSCHEL

588

Table 3
Experiment 3: Mean Z-Transformed Judgments (and Standard
Deviations) as a Function of Time Perspective Scale,
and Standard
Time perspective
Near future
(tomorrow)
Measure
Subjective scale
High standard
Low standard
Objective scale
High standard
Low standard

Control
condition

Distant
future
(1 year)

M

SD

M

SD

M

SD

⫺0.71
0.68

0.72
0.72

⫺0.25
0.25

0.85
1.01

0.64
⫺0.67

0.75
0.78

⫺0.35
0.36

0.33
1.29

0.36
⫺0.36

1.08
0.77

0.56
⫺0.58

1.04
0.51

results. Thus, it seems that mood did not mediate the obtained
results.
The effect of temporal distance on assimilation and contrast
would suggest that similar effects would be found if we manipulated other distance dimensions, as well as level of construal. For
example, familiar others should be assimilated to a standard more
than unfamiliar others (see Mussweiler & Bodenhausen, 2002),
and thinking about a standard’s actions in high-level why terms
(e.g., “Why is Bill Clinton out of shape?”) should enhance assimilation, whereas thinking of the same person in low-level how
terms (e.g., “In what way is Bill Clinton out of shape?”) should
enhance contrast. Our notion would also suggest similar effects for
the dimension of hypotheticality, which is another form of psychological distance, whereby likely, high-probability effects are
proximal and unlikely, improbable events are distant (as is suggested by expressions like “remote possibility”; see Wakslak et al.,
2006). We could predict that the different alternative outcomes of
an unlikely event (e.g., an earthquake) would seem more similar to
each other (i.e., would be assimilated to each other) than the
outcomes of a more likely event (e.g., accepting a job at another
university). More generally, we thought that connecting the question of assimilation versus contrast to psychological distance
opened the door to many interesting and important social psychological questions.
Note that the present experiment is different from the former
experiments with respect to the stage at which global versus
local processing was introduced. Whereas in Experiments 1 and
2, participants “opened up” or “narrowed down” perception
before being exposed to the comparison standard, in this experiment, they were exposed to the standard before being induced with local versus global perception (i.e., before the
temporal distance manipulation). We may assume that selective
activation took place before global versus local processing was
introduced. It seems, therefore, that global versus local processing affected not only the information that was being activated
but also how the activated information was used. In that way,
global versus local processing afforded inclusion versus exclusion of already processed stimuli.
Of course, these results do not mean that GLOMO is irrelevant
for information search and selective activation, a process that we

examined more thoroughly in the next experiment. We think that
because GLOMO, as a relative of IEM, addresses both information
activation and use of activated information, it goes beyond the
former models, which suggested processes that operate at either
the perception phase (like SAM) or the judgment phase (see ICM).
Study 4 examines local versus global processing in combination with another moderator of assimilation versus contrast:
extremity of standard. The literature reports that extreme standards produce contrast rather than assimilation more than do
moderate standards (Herr, 1986; Herr et al., 1983; Mussweiler
et al., 2004; Stapel & Blanton, 2004). We predicted that a global
processing style would lead to assimilative effects with both
extreme and moderate standards and that a local processing
style would lead to contrast effects with both extreme and
moderate standards. This is because even extreme exemplars
can be included into a category if it is sufficiently broad.
Similarly, if the category is narrow, even moderate exemplars
may be excluded from it (see Isen & Daubman, 1984). We also
investigated the accessibility of standard-consistent and
standard-inconsistent knowledge to test whether the induction
of a global processing style leads to a similarity search in
memory; the induction of a local processing style should instead
lead to a dissimilarity search in memory.

Experiment 4: Global Versus Local Processing, Moderate
Versus Extreme Standards, and Accessibility of StandardRelated Knowledge
In order to manipulate extremity of the comparison standard and
accessibility of the self, we modeled Experiment 4 after that of
Dijksterhuis and colleagues (1998), which showed contrast effects
with extreme exemplars (see also Herr, 1986; Herr et al., 1983;
Manis, Nelson, & Shedler, 1988). On the basis of classic research
by Herr (1986) and Sherif and Hovland (1961) among others, those
authors argued that extreme standards produce contrast because
they trigger comparison rather than interpretation mindsets (see
also Stapel, Koomen, & Van der Pligt, 1996; 1997). A similar
prediction follows from IEM because extreme standards are by
definition close to or even outside of category boundaries and may
thus represent lateral (i.e., mutually exclusive) categories, which
would be excluded from the target and thus lead to contrast
(Schwarz & Bless, 2007).
For example, upon seeing a picture of Albert Einstein, one
might think, “I am not Einstein. I am not smart. I am dumb.”
(Dijksterhuis et al., 1998, p. 864). One study by Dijksterhuis et al.
(1998) showed the importance of self-comparison processes for
contrast effects. Participants imagined either a social category
associated with high intelligence (professor) or an intelligent exemplar (Albert Einstein). Dijksterhuis et al. reasoned that if the
extreme exemplar (but not the category) led to a comparative
conclusion (e.g., “I am stupid”), then this process should be
facilitated by priming a self-concept. After being exposed to the
comparison standards, participants made lexical decisions on
words related to intelligence, words related to stupidity, unrelated
words, and nonwords. Each of the words or nonwords was preceded by a subliminal prime that was either related to the self (e.g.,
I, me, my) or unrelated to the self (e.g., the, and). It was found that
participants who were presented with the standard Albert Einstein
responded faster to stupidity words than to intelligence words and

EFFECT OF PROCESSING STYLE ON SOCIAL JUDGMENT

unrelated words compared with those participants who were presented with the category professor. This, however, was only the
case if the target words were preceded by self-primes, not when
they were preceded by control primes. Presumably, the self prime
enhances the saliency of the self category, thereby triggering a
comparison process with an exemplar (but not with a category).
We predicted that after global processing, as compared with a
control condition, the typical contrast to an extreme standard
would be eliminated, giving rise to assimilation because even
extreme exemplars could be included in a broadened category. We
also predicted that after local processing, the typical assimilation to
a moderate standard would be eliminated, giving rise to a contrast
effect. This is because even a moderate standard can be excluded
from a narrow category.
In the present experiment, we asked participants to compare
themselves with either a moderate or an extreme standard that
was either high or low in athletic performance. We then assessed the accessibility of standard-consistent versus standardinconsistent words via a lexical decision task, after presenting a
prime that was either related to the self (e.g., the word me) or
not related to the self (e.g., the word and) before each target
word. Finally, we gauged participants’ self-rating of athletic
performance on the same objective scale used in Experiment 3.
SAM (Mussweiler, 2003) predicts that participants would base
their self-ratings on accessible knowledge and that therefore the
measures of accessibility and self-ratings would show a similar
pattern. Specifically, global processing should enhance the accessibility of standard-consistent information and lead to assimilation. Moreover, local processing should enhance the accessibility of standard-inconsistent information and lead to a
contrast effect. Furthermore, effects on accessibility should be
stronger when self-related primes were presented before the
words in the lexical decision task, as found by Dijksterhuis et
al. (1998) and Mussweiler and Strack (2000). Generally,
GLOMO shares the assumption that selective accessibility
drives assimilation and contrast effects in judgments. However,
GLOMO includes the possibility that assimilation and contrast
can be produced by other mechanisms such as simulation of
nonfactual knowledge (see Markman & McMullen, 2003) or
use of a different scale.

Method
Participants
Participants were 120 undergraduate students (64 women, 56
men) at the University of Bremen majoring in disciplines other
than psychology who were recruited for an experimental session
consisting of diverse psychological tests and lasting approximately
2 hr. They were paid 16 euros for their participation. Four participants refused to answer some of the questions and were excluded
from the analysis.

589

experiment. Afterwards, participants performed a comparison task
that was modeled after that used by Dijksterhuis et al. (1998).
Participants were led to separate booths and seated at a predetermined distance from a 75-Hz computer monitor. Instructions on
the computer screen explained that the study would examine the
extent to which cognitive performance was influenced by comparisons with others. Participants were told that they would first
compare themselves to a famous person and then engage in a
cognitive task. Afterwards, they were instructed about the upcoming lexical decision task—they were told that letter strings would
appear on the computer screen and that they would have to decide
whether they were German words or not. Half of the participants
were told to press the X key to indicate that the presented letter
string was a word and the period key to indicate that it was not a
word. For the other half, the key assignment was reversed. To
reduce variance in response latencies, the experimenter told the
participants to concentrate on the fixation point that appeared in
the center of the screen, where the letter strings would then appear,
to position their forefingers on the two keys, and to keep this
position throughout the lexical decision task. Participants were
instructed to solve this task as quickly and as accurately as possible.
After they had read the instructions on the lexical decision task,
participants were asked to compare their athletic ability to a target
person. Participants were randomly assigned to one of four targets:
race driver Michael Schumacher (the moderately high standard),
bicycle racer Jan Ulrich (the extremely high standard), former U.S.
president Bill Clinton (the moderately low standard), and former
German chancellor Helmut Kohl (the extremely low standard).6 A
pretest with a similar sample showed that these standards produced
assimilation for the moderate standards and contrast for the extreme standards.
The lexical decision task immediately followed the comparison task. We used four different sets of stimuli words:
standard-consistent, standard-inconsistent, neutral, and nonwords. Of all 27 presented words, 4 words were associated with
being athletic (fit [fit], athletisch [athletic], dynamisch [dynamic], trainiert [in good shape]), 4 were associated with being
unathletic (steif [stiff], schwach [weak], schwerfällig [heavy],
plump [plump]), 10 words were neutral (e.g., läutern [purify],
Kuh [cow]), and nine were nonwords (e.g., molen, schonzem).
These stimuli were identical to Mussweiler and Strack’s (2000)
stimuli. Nevertheless, we pretested the words of the first two
sets with a sample similar to the one in the present experiment
and found that the words were indeed related to being athletic
and being unathletic, respectively. We combined half of the
stimuli words with self-primes, which were words closely associated with the self (Ich [I], mein [my], mir [me]), and the
other half with control primes which were not associated with

Materials and Procedure
After arrival, participants were asked to perform diverse, allegedly unrelated tasks. The first task they worked on was the global–
local processing task used in Experiment 2. To reduce the experimental design, we used no control priming group in the present

6
Michael Schumacher was at that time a famous Formula One race
driver. Jan Ulrich was a professional road bicycle racer, the first German
to win the Tour de France. The experiment took place before he was part
of a doping scandal. Helmut Kohl was a chancellor of Germany and was
known for his lack of interest in sports.

FÖRSTER, LIBERMAN, AND KUSCHEL

590

Results

standards produced assimilation after global processing (Mhigh ⫽
40.88, SD ⫽ 4.20; Mlow ⫽ 23.64, SD ⫽ 4.50), t(56) ⫽ 2.65, p ⬍
.01, and a contrast effect after local processing (Mhigh⫽ 27.58,
SD ⫽ 4.34; Mlow ⫽ 38.04; SD ⫽ 4.34), t(56) ⫽ ⫺1.90, p ⫽ .06.
The results are summarized in Table 4. It seems that after activation of a local versus global processing style, the typical effect of
standard extremity was not replicated. Instead of assimilating to a
moderate standard and contrasting away from an extreme standard,
participants with global processing assimilated their selfevaluations to both moderate and extreme standards, whereas
participants with local processing contrasted their judgments away
from both moderate and extreme standards.
Lexical decision times. We omitted reaction times that were
more than 3 standard deviations higher or lower than the mean
reaction time for each target word (1.2 % of the responses). An
assimilationlike effect would be expressed by an enhanced accessibility of athletic words and a reduced accessibility of nonathletic
words with an athletic standard (i.e., when direction of standard
was high) compared with an unathletic standard (i.e., when direction of standard was low). A contrastlike effect would produce an
opposite pattern: a reduced accessibility of athletic words and an
enhanced accessibility of nonathletic words with an athletic standard (i.e., when direction of standard was high) compared with
an unathletic standard (i.e., when direction of standard was
low). We conducted a 2 (processing) ⫻ 2 (direction of standard) ⫻ 2 (extremity of standard) ⫻ 2 (word type) ⫻ 2
(self-priming) ANOVA for mixed designs. The results are summarized in Table 5.
On the basis of SAM (Mussweiler & Strack, 2000) and
GLOMO, we predicted an assimilationlike effect would occur after
global processing, and a contrastlike effect would occur after local
processing, but only with words that had been primed with selfrelated concepts. Thus, we expected a four-way interaction among
processing, direction of standard, self-prime, and word type. The
analysis revealed no significant main effects, all Fs ⬍ 1, but a
significant two-way interaction between word type and direction
of standard, F(1, 108) ⫽ 14.39, p ⬍ .0001, and a significant
three-way interaction among direction of standard, word type, and
processing style, F(1, 108) ⫽ 27.82, p ⬍ .0001. There were no
other significant lower order interactions. These interaction effects
were further qualified by the predicted four-way interaction among
processing, direction of standard, self-priming, and word type that
proved to be significant, F(1, 108) ⫽ 26.17, p ⬍ .0001. This
interaction was not further qualified by a five-way interaction with

In presenting the results, we start with participants’ self evaluations. We then move to examine reaction times of lexical decisions and finally to examine mediation of objective ratings by
accessibility of standard-related knowledge as measured by the
length of time taken to make lexical decision.
Self-evaluations. We calculated the mean number of knee
bends and push-ups and conducted a 2 (processing: global vs.
local) ⫻ 2 (direction of standard: high vs. low) ⫻ 2 (extremity of
standard: extreme vs. moderate) between-subjects ANOVA. This
analysis yielded the predicted two-way interaction between direction of standard and processing, F(1, 108) ⫽ 10.14, p ⬍ .002.
There were no other significant effects, all Fs ⬍ 1. The obtained
interaction indicated that, as predicted, both extreme and moderate

7
A reviewer suggested that the distinction between the primes does not
necessarily reflect a manipulation of self-relevance but rather could reflect
a difference on the dimension “person” versus “no person.” This is possible. We wanted to replicate former studies that produced assimilation
versus contrast effects only under the condition that self-primes preceded
the judgments (see Dijksterhuis et al. 1998; Mussweiler & Strack, 2000).
Future research should examine whether similar results could be obtained
with “person not me” primes (e.g., she or her). For our purposes, however,
what is important is that accessibility was affected by global versus local
processing and that it mediated the effect of global versus local processing
on judgment. From this perspective, the interpretation of the results would
not change even if a similar effect may be obtained by “person not me”
primes.

the self (und [and], oder [or], aber [but]).7 Altogether, we
constructed two lists of 27 prime–target combinations for the
lexical decision task. In the first list, half of each target category
was preceded by a suboptimally presented self-prime, whereas
the other half was preceded by a suboptimally presented neutral
prime. For the second list, this assignment was reversed, so that
across the two lists each word was preceded once by a selfprime and once by a neutral prime. Within the two prime
categories, the individual primes were randomly assigned to the
specific targets. The order of the prime–target combinations
was randomly determined for both lists. Thus, for each list, 2 of
the words that were associated with being athletic were preceded by a self-prime, and 2 were preceded by a neutral prime.
Similarly, 2 of the words that were associated with being
unathletic were preceded by a self-prime, and 2 were preceded
by a neutral prime. In addition, 5 of the neutral words and 4 of
the nonwords were preceded by a self-prime, and the remaining
5 neutral words and 5 nonwords were preceded by a neutral
prime. All primes were presented suboptimally (60-ms presentation with a 60-ms mask).
In sum, after the global–local processing task participants compared themselves with moderately high, extremely high, moderately low, or extremely low standards of athletic performance and
then made lexical decisions about words associated with being
athletic and words associated with being unathletic. Half of these
lexical decisions were preceded by a suboptimal self-prime, and
the other half were preceded by a suboptimal control, non-selfrelated prime. Finally, participants estimated the maximum number of knee bends and push-ups they could perform (i.e., estimated
their athletic performance on an objective scale). We did not
include a subjective scale to reduce the experimental design.
Thus, our experiment comprised two dependent measures: Lexical decision times served as our first dependent measure; responses on the objective scale were the second measure. For the
lexical decision, the experimental design was a 2 (processing:
global vs. local) ⫻ 2 (standard: high vs. low) ⫻ 2 (extremity of
standard: extreme vs. moderate) ⫻ 2 (word type: related to athletic
vs. related to unathletic) ⫻ 2 (self-priming: self vs. control prime)
factorial design. In this design, the first three factors were manipulated between participants, whereas the last two factors were
manipulated within participants. For the scale ratings, the experimental design was the same except for the two last factors, which
were excluded.

EFFECT OF PROCESSING STYLE ON SOCIAL JUDGMENT

Table 4
Experiment 4: Mean Judgments (and Standard Deviations) of
Athletic Ability as a Function of Induced Processing Style,
Extremity of Standard, and Direction of Standard
Induced processing style
Local
Extremity of
standard
Moderate
High direction
Low direction
Extreme
High direction
Low direction

Global

M

SD

M

SD

27.30
34.75

11.28
23.21

36.80
24.75

31.71
12.78

27.86
41.33

15.68
30.46

44.97
22.54

33.53
9.11

extremity of standard, F ⬍ 1. To better understand this effect, we
now examine more specific predictions.
As noted before, we predicted an effect of processing, direction
of standard, and word type on lexical decision times for words
preceded by a self-prime but not for those preceded by a selfirrelevant prime. Thus, we conducted separate analyses for words
preceded by a self-prime and words preceded by a control prime.
When the prime was unrelated to the self, a 2 (processing: global
vs. local) ⫻ 2 (standard: high vs. low) ⫻ 2 (extremity of standard:
extreme vs. moderate) ⫻ 2 (word type: related to athletic vs.
related to unathletic) yielded no significant three-way interaction,
F ⬍ 1.1. However, when the primes were related to the self, the
same analysis yielded a three-way interaction among processing,
standard, and word type, F(1, 108) ⫽ 39.65, p ⬍ .0001. This
interaction was not qualified by extremity of standard.
In the following, we present simple comparison analyses to
examine differences in accessibility of athletic and unathletic
words between the high and low standard conditions. We examined only the self-priming condition (as no effects on accessibility
were obtained in the non-self-priming condition) and collapsed
data across extreme and moderate standards (as extremity did not
affect accessibility).
We conducted two separate 2 (word type) ⫻ 2 (standard)
analyses for global and local priming conditions, respectively.

591

These analyses revealed a significant two-way interaction in the
local priming condition, F(1, 56) ⫽ 42.09, p ⬍ .0001, and a
(somewhat weaker) two-way interaction for the global priming
condition, F(1, 56) ⫽ 4.47, p ⬍ .04. Further contrast analyses
showed a significant contrast for the local priming condition for
athletic words (Mhigh ⫽ 689, SD ⫽ 201, and Mlow ⫽ 557, SD ⫽
81), t(56) ⫽ 3.26, p ⬍ .002, as well as for unathletic words
(Mhigh ⫽ 550, SD ⫽ 133, and Mlow ⫽ 693, SD ⫽ 74), t(56) ⫽ 5.07,
p ⬍ .001). For the global priming condition, means were in the
predicted direction of assimilation effects, but the contrasts were
not significant (Mhigh ⫽ 589, SD ⫽ 82, and Mlow ⫽ 648, SD ⫽
184), t(56) ⫽ 1.61, p ⫽ .11, for the athletic words, and (Mhigh ⫽
631, SD ⫽ 121, and Mlow ⫽ 613, SD ⫽ 73), t ⬍ 1, for the
unathletic words).
We find it interesting that even though we found significant
assimilation and contrast effects on the self-evaluation measures in
both the global and the local priming conditions, the accessibility
measures only partly supported our hypotheses. For the local
priming condition, we found significant contrast effects; for the
global priming condition, means were in the predicted direction of
assimilation effects, but the contrasts did not reach significance
(although the interaction was significant). This might suggest that
accessibility only partly mediates effects on evaluation, a possibility we examine in the next section.
Mediation analyses. We now examine whether accessibility as
measured in the lexical decision task mediated the effect of direction of standard on self-judgments. According to Baron and Kenny
(1986), two necessary preconditions for establishing mediation are
(a) that the independent variable must predict both the dependent
variable and the mediator (an effect we already reported earlier)
and (b) that the mediator must predict the dependent variable.
Once these preconditions are fulfilled, the dependent variable
regresses onto the independent variable and the mediator in a final
regression analysis. Support for mediation is obtained by showing
that the effect of the independent variable (i.e., high vs. low
standard) on the dependent variable (i.e., the judgment) is significantly reduced when one has accounted for the effect of the
hypothesized mediator (i.e., accessibility of athletic vs. unathletic
words).

Table 5
Experiment 4: Mean Reaction Times (and Standard Deviations) as a Function of Induced Processing Style Priming, Word Type,
Standard, and Extremity of Standard
Local processing style
Self-priming
Athletic
words
Extremity of
standard
Moderate
High
Low
Extreme
High
Low

Global processing style

Control priming

Unathletic
words

Athletic
words

Self-priming

Unathletic
words

Athletic
words

Control priming

Unathletic
words

Athletic
words

Unathletic
words

M

SD

M

SD

M

SD

M

SD

M

SD

M

SD

M

SD

M

SD

695
516

163
61

538
698

137
59

635
579

88
92

601
628

55
83

589
643

77
172

633
625

101
81

646
626

75
71

599
624

65
185

682
596

242
80

563
689

132
88

632
659

100
94

618
650

110
98

589
653

88
203

629
600

140
65

611
641

82
58

604
640

84
66

592

FÖRSTER, LIBERMAN, AND KUSCHEL

We conducted two mediation analyses, one for the local condition and one for the global condition. In both analyses, low
standard was coded as –1 and high standard was coded as 1. In
order to test for mediation, we used a difference score of accessibility of athletic and unathletic words (athletic– unathletic). Because extremity of standard did not affect either accessibility or
ratings, we cumulated data over this factor, and because effects on
lexical decisions were predicted and were only found for words
preceded by a self-prime, we included these words only in the
mediation analyses.
Self-ratings of athletic ability were related to accessibility in
both the local priming condition, ␤ ⫽ ⫺.36, t(56) ⫽ ⫺2.86, p ⬍
.01, and the global priming condition, ␤ ⫽ ⫺.43, t(56) ⫽ ⫺3.53,
p ⬍ .001. Higher accessibility of athletic concepts (i.e., faster
lexical decisions for those concepts) relative to the accessibility of
unathletic concepts enhanced self-ratings of athletic ability. Direction of standard (high vs. low) predicted the difference in accessibility of athletic versus unathletic words in both the local priming
condition, ␤ ⫽ .66, t(56) ⫽ 6.49, p ⬍ .001, and the global priming
condition, ␤ ⫽ ⫺.27, t(56) ⫽ ⫺2.09, p ⬍ .04.
We turn now to the regression analyses. Self-ratings were significantly predicted by direction of standard in the local priming
condition, ␤ ⫽ ⫺.25, t(56) ⫽ ⫺1.90, p ⫽ .06, and in the global
priming condition, ␤ ⫽ .33, t(56) ⫽ 2.65, p ⬍ .01 (of course, as
noted before, the direction of this effect was opposite, representing
contrast after local priming and assimilation after global priming).
In the local priming condition, when both direction of standard and
the relative accessibility of athletic versus unathletic words were
entered into the regression, the effect of direction of standard was
rendered insignificant, ␤ ⫽ ⫺.02, t(56) ⫽ ⫺0.12, p ⫽ .90, whereas
in the global priming condition, the effect of direction of standard
remained significant even after we controlled for accessibility of
athletic versus unathletic words, ␤ ⫽ .24, t(56) ⫽ 1.93, p ⫽ .06.
We conducted two Sobel tests for local and global conditions.
The mediation was significant in the local priming condition, Z ⫽
1.96, p ⫽ .05, but not in the global priming condition, Z ⫽ 1.71,
p ⫽ .09. Thus, accessibility of athletic versus unathletic words
significantly mediated the effect of comparison standard on selfrating in a local processing condition but not in the global processing condition, in which the mediation was not significant and
the direct effect of standard on self-ratings remained significant
even after the mediator was controlled. In other words, if a local
processing style was induced, knowledge about sportsmanship was
activated when participants compared themselves with a low,
unathletic standard, and knowledge about lack of sportsmanship
was activated when participants compared themselves with a high,
athletic standard. Participants then used this knowledge to judge
their own athletic ability, producing a contrast effect. A similar
effect, however, was not obtained if a global processing style was
induced. Although knowledge about sportsmanship was activated
when participants compared themselves with a high, athletic standard and knowledge about lack of sportsmanship was activated
when people compared themselves with a low, unathletic standard
and although this knowledge was then used for the judgment; it
seems that the assimilation effect was not fully accounted for by
this enhanced accessibility.
These mediation results provide some support for SAM (Mussweiler & Strack, 2000), according to which selective activated
knowledge mediates some of the assimilation versus contrast ef-

fects. At the same time, it suggests the existence of mechanisms
unrelated to selective activation that may produce assimilation.

Experiment 5: Global Versus Local Processing, Moderate
Standards, Subjective Versus Objective Scales, and
Relative Hemisphere Activation
An intriguing finding is that global versus local processing
seems to be related to right versus left hemisphere activation:
Right hemisphere activation has been characterized as involving
an expanded scope of both perceptual and conceptual attention,
whereas the left hemisphere is said to involve a narrow scope of
attention (e.g., Beeman, 1998; Burgess & Simpson, 1988; Friedman & Förster, 2005). For example, extensive empirical evidence
has shown that trait anxiety is associated with greater left hemispheric activity (Tucker, Antes, Stenslie, & Barnhardt, 1978; Tyler
& Tucker, 1982; see also, e.g., Baxter et. al., 1987; Buchsbaum et
al., 1985) and that this enhanced left hemispheric activation is
associated with a narrowed focus of perceptual attention (Derryberry & Reed, 1998). More important, in the aforementioned
model by Tucker and colleagues (Derryberry & Tucker, 1994;
Tucker & Williamson, 1984), the relation between perceptual
scope and conceptual scope is assumed to be hardwired. Whereas
the right hemisphere is associated with both global perception and
broad conceptual scope, the left hemisphere is thought to be
associated with both local perception and narrow conceptual
scope. Providing preliminary evidence for such a biological explanation could potentially open the field of research on assimilation and contrast to research on other psychological phenomena
that are related to hemisphere asymmetries.
We will postpone the discussion of such consequences until the
General Discussion and for now discuss whether global processing, inclusion, and assimilation are associated with right hemisphere activation and local processing, whereas exclusion and
contrast are associated with left hemisphere activation.
Experiment 5 replicated Experiment 2 with one major difference: After the processing style induction and before the judgment
task, we introduced an assessment of hemisphere activation in
order to examine whether it would mediate the effect of induced
processing style on assimilation versus contrast. Our expectation
was that stronger right hemisphere activation would be related to
assimilation, whereas stronger left hemisphere activation would be
related to contrast.

Method
Participants
Participants were 128 undergraduate students (67 women, 61
men) at the University of Bremen majoring in disciplines other
than psychology who were recruited for an experiment consisting
of diverse psychological tests and lasting approximately 2 hr. They
were paid 16 euros for participation. Five participants did not
answer all the questions and were excluded from the analysis.

Materials
Relative hemispheric activation was gauged using a line bisection task (Milner, Brechmann, & Pagliarini, 1992; see also Bisiach,
Geminiani, Berti, & Rusconi, 1990; Bowers & Heilman, 1980;

EFFECT OF PROCESSING STYLE ON SOCIAL JUDGMENT

Bradshaw, Nathan, Nettleton, Wilson, & Pierson, 1987). There are
multiple versions of this task. In the one that we used in the present
experiment, participants are provided with a series of lines and are
asked to mark the center of each line. Typically, participants
commit a leftward error, signifying an attentional bias toward the
left visual field (LVF), which manifests itself in an attentional
neglect of the rightward extension of the line (Milner et al., 1992).
Presumably, this nomothetic LVF bias reflects increased relative
right hemispheric activation and is engendered by the perceptual–
motor demands of the task. However, there is also demonstrable
ideographic variation in the extent of this bias; therefore, the line
bisection task can serve as a behavioral index of transient and
chronic individual differences in relative hemispheric activation
(e.g., Friedman & Förster, 2005; Martin, Shrira, & Startup, in
press; Morton, 2003).

Procedure
Participants first worked on several unrelated tasks for about 30
min. They then completed the Navon letter task as in Experiment
2, after which they were asked to perform an evaluation task. They
were asked to compare themselves with the standards, but before
rating themselves, they were asked to perform an ostensibly unrelated task, supposedly intended to provide mental rest and enable
them to make better judgments. This was the line bisection task, as
used by Friedman and Förster (2005). Participants marked the
center of each in a series of lines printed on two sheets of paper,
using writing implements held in their dominant hand (right or left
was not specified by the experimenter). Right- versus lefthandedness was subsequently assessed by self-report and did not
differ across conditions, nor did it affect the results. Participants
bisected altogether 22 lines of different lengths (11.5, 9.0, 11.5,
11.5, 14.3, 10.8, 13.4, 10.5, 11.5, 13.5, 10.3, 14.3, 9.4, 12.8, 12.3,
12.3, 12.3, 11.9, 10.4, 11.9, 13.4, and 13.8 cm). After the line
bisection task, participants completed self-ratings on objective and
subjective scales, as described in Experiment 2.
In sum then, like Experiment 2, Experiment 5 was based on a 3
(processing: global vs. local vs. control) ⫻ 2 (standard: high vs.
low) ⫻ 2 (scale: objective vs. subjective) factorial design, with
only the last factor manipulated within participants. The predictions were the same as in Experiment 2: We predicted that relative
to the control condition, the global processing condition would
produce more assimilation on both the subjective and the objective
scale, and the local processing condition would produce more
contrast on both scales. Hemisphere activation as assessed by the
line bisections was expected to mediate the effects of induced
processing style on self-ratings.

Results
Self-evaluation. As in our previous experiments, we
z-transformed the ratings on the objective and subjective scales
(for means, see Table 6) and conducted a 3 (processing: global vs.
local vs. control) ⫻ 2 (standard: high vs. low) ⫻ 2 (scale: objective
vs. subjective) ANOVA for mixed designs, which yielded twoway interactions between scale and standard, F(1, 117) ⫽ 11.23,
p ⬍ .001, and between processing and standard, F(2, 117) ⫽
13.79, p ⬍ .0001. More important, the predicted three-way interaction was significant, F(2, 117) ⫽ 4.58, p ⬍ .02. There were no

593

Table 6
Experiment 5: Mean Z-Transformed Judgments (and Standard
Deviations) as a Function of Induced Processing Style, scale,
and standard
Induced processing style
Local
Measure
Subjective scale
High standard
Low standard
Objective scale
High standard
Low standard

M

Control

Global

SD

M

SD

M

SD

⫺0.53
0.52

0.74
1.37

⫺0.25
0.30

0.85
0.75

0.32
⫺0.35

1.07
0.68

⫺0.51
0.50

0.51
1.38

0.25
⫺0.35

0.78
0.48

0.62
⫺0.42

1.38
0.35

other effects, Fs ⬍ 1. The three-way interaction shows that the
findings of Mussweiler and Strack (2000) were successfully replicated in the control processing condition, indicating contrast on
the subjective scale (Mhigh ⫽ ⫺0.25, SD ⫽ 0.85, vs. Mlow ⫽ 0.30,
SD ⫽ 0.75), t(39) ⫽ 2.20, p ⬍ .04, and assimilation on the
objective scale (Mhigh ⫽ .25, SD ⫽ .78, vs. Mlow ⫽ ⫺0.35, SD ⫽
0.48), t(39) ⫽ 3.00, p ⬍ .01. However, as predicted and as shown
in Experiment 2, in the global processing condition, assimilation
was found for both the objective scale (Mhigh ⫽ 0.62, SD ⫽ 1.38,
vs. Mlow ⫽ ⫺0.42, SD ⫽ 0.35), t(38) ⫽ 3.24, p ⬍ .01, and the
subjective scale (Mhigh ⫽ 0.32, SD ⫽ 1.07, vs. Mlow ⫽ ⫺0.35,
SD ⫽ 0.68), t(38) ⫽ 2.37, p ⬍ .03. Contrary to this, in the local
processing condition, the predicted contrast effect was found for
both the objective scale (Mhigh ⫽ ⫺0.51, SD ⫽ 0.51, vs. Mlow ⫽
0.50, SD ⫽ 1.38), t(40) ⫽ 3.22, p ⬍ .01, and the subjective scale
(Mhigh ⫽ ⫺0.53, SD ⫽ 0.74, vs. Mlow ⫽ 0.52, SD ⫽ 1.37), t(40) ⫽
3.14, p ⬍ .01. These results fully replicate the results of Experiments 2 and 3.
Perceptual asymmetry. To reiterate, we predicted that participants induced with global processing would exhibit more pronounced leftward bisection errors, demonstrating greater relative
right hemispheric activation (RHA) and smaller relative left hemispheric activation (LHA) than those in the control group, who
would exhibit more pronounced leftward errors than participants
with induced local processing. To assess these predictions, we
measured the deviations of participants’ bisection marks from the
lines’ true midpoints in centimeters. The obtained values were
averaged across the 22 lines to create an overall bisection error
index with negative values indicating a leftward bias (i.e., a mean
leftward deviation from center; greater leftward deviations signify
greater relative RHA). We multiplied these values by –1 so that
positive values signify relative greater RHA.
As shown in Table 7, the pattern of bisection errors was in
accord with our predictions, as revealed by the results of a Processing ⫻ Standard ANOVA, which indicated a significant main
effect of processing, F(2, 117) ⫽ 10.09, p ⬍ .0001, and no other
effects, Fs ⬍ 1. More specifically, participants in the global
processing condition demonstrated greater RHA (M ⫽ 0.97, SD ⫽
1.86) than participants in the control condition (M ⫽ 0.26, SD ⫽
1.54), t(120) ⫽ 1.95, p ⫽ .05, who, in turn, demonstrated a greater
RHA than participants in the local processing condition (M ⫽
⫺.67, SD ⫽ 1.47), t(120) ⫽ 2.60, p ⫽ .01.

FÖRSTER, LIBERMAN, AND KUSCHEL

594

Table 7
Experiment 5: Mean Right Hemispheric Activation (and
Standard Deviations) as Measured by the Line Bisection Task as
a Function of Induced Processing Style and Standard
Induced processing style
Local

Control

Global

Standard

M

SD

M

SD

M

SD

High
Low

⫺0.70
⫺0.63

1.68
1.25

0.30
0.23

1.05
1.89

0.97
0.97

1.85
1.92

Note. Measured in centimeters. Higher values indicate higher right hemispheric activation.

Mediation by hemisphere activation. To determine whether
the judgment was mediated by hemisphere activation, we examined whether the effect of processing styles on self-judgment was
significantly reduced when hemispheric activation was entered as
another predictor in a regression analysis. To test our predictions,
we conducted two separate mediation analyses for the high and
low standard conditions with an index that combined subjective
and objective scales because in the local and global processing
conditions (but not in the control condition), they were highly
correlated (r ⫽ .84; p ⬍ .0001 for the low standards, and r ⫽ .74;
p ⬍ .0001 for the high standards) and were similarly affected by
global versus local processing. Local processing was coded as –1,
and global processing was coded as 1.
For both high and low standards, hemisphere activation was a
significant predictor of judgment: ␤ ⫽ ⫺.57, t(40) ⫽ ⫺4.25, p ⬍
.0001, for the low standard, and ␤ ⫽ .67, t(38) ⫽ 5.70, p ⬍ .0001,
for the high standard. The higher the relative RHA was, the higher
the judgment after high standards (indicating an assimilation effect
with high standards) and the lower the judgment after low standards (indicating an assimilation effect with low standards).
In the final stage of the mediation analysis, processing styles and
hemisphere activation were entered jointly to predict judgments.
For high standards, the effect of RHA remained significant, ␤ ⫽
.56, t(39) ⫽ 4.45, p ⬍ .001, and the effect of global versus local
processing was reduced, ␤ ⫽.25, t(39) ⫽ 2.02, p ⬍ .05. A Sobel
test of the significance of the mediation, Z ⫽ 2.52, p ⬍ .01,
confirmed that the effect of processing style on judgment was
partially mediated by RHA.
For the low standards, a similar pattern emerged. When entered
jointly into the regression, the effect of RHA remained significant,
␤ ⫽ ⫺.47, t(37) ⫽ ⫺3.21, p ⬍ .01, and the effect of processing
style was reduced, ␤ ⫽ ⫺.21, t(37) ⫽ ⫺1.40, p ⫽ .17. A Sobel test
of the significance of mediation, Z ⫽ ⫺2.24, p ⫽ .03, indicated
that the effect of processing style on judgment was partially
mediated by hemisphere activation.

General Discussion
Five experiments showed that inducing a global processing style
enhanced assimilation of a target to a prime or a comparison
standard, whereas inducing a local processing style enhanced the
contrasting of a target away from a prime or a comparison standard. Global versus local processing styles were induced by mak-

ing participants attend to global letters or to local letters in a Navon
task (Experiments 2, 4, and 5; Navon, 1977), by making them look
at the global shape of a map or at its details (Experiment 1;
Friedman et al., 2003), or by making them think of the distant
future or the near future (Experiment 3; Liberman & Trope, 1998;
Liberman et al., 2002). In Experiment 1, we looked at a classic
priming paradigm in which perception of an ambiguous target is
the dependent measure, whereas in Experiments 2–5, we looked at
self-ratings after comparison to a standard.
We found that global versus local processing influenced judgments both when processing was introduced after the standard and
the target (Experiment 3) and when processing was introduced
before the standard and the target (Experiments 1, 2, 4, and 5).
This results points to an important aspect of GLOMO: Like IEM,
it encompasses both processes by which a differential use of
identical input information may produce assimilation versus contrast and processes by which the input itself is changed to produce
assimilation versus contrast effects.
In addition to the effects of global versus local processing on
assimilation and contrast, we explored possible mediators in Experiments 4 and 5. In Experiment 4, we examined accessibility of
standard-consistent and standard-inconsistent concepts and found
that when local processing was induced, the standard produced
contrast via its effect on increasing accessibility of standardinconsistent knowledge. However, when global processing was
induced, it created accessibility not only by increasing accessibility
of standard-consistent concepts. In other words, it is possible that
in global processing, assimilation was not only produced by accessibility, as would be predicted by SAM. In Experiment 5, we
examined relative RHA and found that global processing style,
compared with local processing style, increased assimilation relative to contrast by increasing relative RHA.
In addition to processing style, two moderators of assimilation
versus contrast were manipulated in Experiments 2–5: type of
scale (subjective vs. objective, in Experiments 2, 3, and 5) and
extremity of standard (extreme vs. moderate, in Experiment 4). In
the literature, subjective scales and extreme standards have been
found to produce more contrast and less assimilation than objective scales and moderate standards. We replicated the scale effect
in the control condition of Experiments 2 and 3 (i.e., when neither
global nor local processing was induced). In the control condition
of these studies, a contrast effect emerged with subjective scales
and an assimilation effect emerged with objective scales. In our
experiments, the effect of global versus local processing overrode
the effect of type of scale and the effect of standard extremity. This
finding does not mean, however, that processing style would
always override these factors. Furthermore, it is impossible to
determine which of these effects is stronger because their strength
obviously depends on experimental manipulations. All we wished
to show is that global versus local processing is a potent manipulation that exerts an effect that is distinct from these moderators.
No less important is the fact that we think that many of the
moderators of assimilation and contrast—including processing
style—may be integrated into the IEM (Schwarz & Bless, 1992;
2007). They constitute different ways to make the target and the
comparison-standard (or the prime) seem close, similar, and indistinct as opposed to distant, separate, and different. GLOMO, as a
relative of IEM, does not obliterate the specific moderators of
assimilation and contrast as suggested by other models. Each such

EFFECT OF PROCESSING STYLE ON SOCIAL JUDGMENT

moderator points to an interesting and important phenomenon and
to a different set of antecedents of assimilation versus contrast.
We think that the moderator we propose— global versus local
processing— derives its importance from the fact that it opens the
way to connect assimilation versus contrast to a vast number of
potentially interesting variables that are known to affect global
versus local processing. Some of them we examined in our article.
Others we will now briefly review, obviously not exhausting the
range of possibilities.

Additional Potential Moderators of Global Versus Local
Processing
Self-Regulation
Recently, global versus local processing has been related to
regulatory focus (Higgins, 2000). Förster and Higgins (2005)
measured participants’ chronic promotion or prevention focus and
gauged their performance in the Navon task. They found that
strength of promotion focus (i.e., a chronic focus on ideals and
aspirations) was positively correlated with speed of processing
global letters and negatively correlated with speed of processing
local letters, whereas the reverse was true for strength of prevention focus (i.e., a chronic focus on security and “oughts”). On the
basis of our findings in the present article, we could expect more
assimilation and less contrast effects for promotion-focused participants relative to prevention-focused participants. We are currently testing this prediction and have initial confirming evidence
(Förster & Friedman, 2006) showing that a promotion focus enhances assimilation effects in classic priming tasks and in selfcomparison, whereas a prevention focus leads to the opposite.

Positive Mood
Mood has been shown to affect processing style (see Förster et
al., 2006; Gasper & Clore, 2002). In a series of recent studies,
Gasper (2004; Gasper & Clore, 2002) showed that elated mood
promoted classification of global–local composite figures (e.g.,
squares composed of symmetrically arranged triangles) on the
basis of their global form as opposed to their components. In a
similar vein, Basso, Schefft, Ris, and Dember (1996) found that
trait happiness was associated with a proclivity to categorize visual
images on the basis of global rather than local structure. Would
positive mood also enhance assimilation and reduce contrast?
Further research will have to address this question.

Anxiety and Obsessive–Compulsive Styles
Mikulincer, Kedem, and Paz (1990; see also Mikulincer, Paz, &
Kedem, 1990) found a correlation between rejecting an item from
a category and both trait and state anxiety. Yovel et al., (2005)
found that obsessive– compulsive behavior, which is assumed to
be related to anxiety, was associated with local processing in the
Navon task. It would be interesting to examine whether anxiety
and obsessive– compulsive behavior are related to assimilation
versus contrast, as is the case with positive mood.

Approach Versus Avoidance
Not only regulatory focus and mood have been found to affect
processing style but also subtle external or interoceptive approach

595

versus avoidance cues. Recently, Förster et al. (2006) asked participants to complete a maze in which a mouse was either escaping
from an owl or trying to find a piece of cheese and then to perform
the Navon task. The owl maze activates avoidance motivation,
whereas the cheese maze activates approach motivation (Friedman
& Förster, 2002). The study found enhanced global processing in
the approach condition and enhanced local processing in the avoidance condition. We find it interesting that these effects were
independent from self-reported mood. Would approach versus
avoidance also affect assimilation versus contrast? Recently, we
have obtained initial results in support of that hypothesis. Using a
classic paradigm of subtly inducing approach versus avoidance
motivation, we manipulated arm flexion (approach) versus arm
extension (avoidance; see Cacioppo, Priester, & Berntson, 1993;
Förster, 2004; Förster & Strack, 1997; 1998; Neumann & Strack,
2000; Priester, Cacioppo, & Petty, 1996). We found assimilative
effects in social comparisons in the former condition, and contrast
effects in the latter condition (Förster, 2007b).

Construal of the Self
Connecting recent theorizing on the self with our model could
be another starting point for new research. In general, the self can
be construed as a broader or a narrower category (DeSteno &
Salovey, 1997; Markus & Kunda; 1986). For example, a person
may think about him- or herself as a human being or as a psychology student, with the former being a broader category than the
latter. Recently, Fishbach and Förster (2006) showed that participants who were induced to process globally via the global Navon
task described themselves in broader categories compared with
participants who were induced to process locally via the local
Navon task. These findings suggest that global versus local processing of the self would produce more assimilation to the self and
less contrasting away from the self in various judgments, even if
global versus local judgment is not activated at the time of the
judgment is made.

Brain Research
Experiment 5 provides preliminary evidence for a partial mediation by hemisphere activation for our priming effects on social
comparisons. This finding has repercussions for brain research on
higher cognitive processes. It is a well-supported notion that global
processing is associated with RHA and local processing is associated with LHA (see Derryberry & Reed, 1998). For one thing,
one could investigate whether this link is bidirectional. We would
hypothesize, for example, that placing questions at the right side of
the perceptual field (thereby activating LH) would lead to contrast
in comparison, whereas placing questions at the left side (thereby
activating RH) would lead to assimilation. Moreover, consistent
with the theorizing of Derryberry and Tucker (1994), RHA has
been characterized as involving an expanded scope of attention on
the perceptual and conceptual levels (see, e.g., Beeman, 1998;
Burgess & Simpson, 1988; Fiore & Schooler, 1998). An example
of a conceptual task posited to require RHA is creative task
performance, which also profits from expanded scope of attention
(see Friedman & Förster, 2005). Relating assimilation versus contrast research to the same neurobiological system may lead to new
research questions. One may wonder, for example, how similarity

596

FÖRSTER, LIBERMAN, AND KUSCHEL

search is related to creativity if a creativity task affords quite the
opposite: finding something different from the norm. Our results
may suggest that, quite counterintuitively, the process involved in
creative generation is searching for similarities that formerly did
not exist. Consider the following example: In a typical unusual
uses paradigm (e.g., “Find as many uses for a brick as you can”),
a person generates a relatively creative solution such as “I grind it
up and use it as makeup.” The underlying process may be a broad
search for similarity (the substance of the brick is similar to
makeup powder) that enhances finding new uses (see Friedman &
Förster, 2005; 2007). As an alternative, a global perspective that
may be related to RHA may lead to use of more abstract concepts
(e.g., the substance of the brick), enhancing creative generation.
Similarly, metaphor comprehension, which demands broadened
conceptual attention to nonliteral (and thereby nondominant) word
meanings (Beeman, 1998) is related to RHA. Further research may
relate assimilation effects to metaphor understanding and creativity.

Relation of GLOMO to Other Process Models of
Assimilation Versus Contrast
Our approach does not contradict recent models, such as SAM
by Mussweiler and Strack (for a review, see Mussweiler, 2003),
ICM by Stapel and colleagues (for a review, see Stapel, 2007), or
REM by Markman and McMullen (2003), but it has the potential
to integrate aspects of all models. Let us briefly summarize the
theoretical and empirical points of similarity between GLOMO
and these models, as well as points at which these models depart
from each other.
SAM (e.g., Mussweiler, 2003) suggests that assimilation results
from searching for similarity between the target and the comparison standard and an enhanced accessibility of standard-consistent
information. Likewise, contrast results from searching for differences between the target and the comparison standard and an
enhanced accessibility of standard-inconsistent information. Our
Experiment 4 showed that accessibility of standard-consistent versus standard-inconsistent knowledge partly mediates assimilation
versus contrast effects. More specifically, we showed that local
processing activated standard-inconsistent information, thereby
leading to contrast. However, there was no conclusive evidence
that global processing led to assimilation by activating standardconsistent information. Moreover, in Study 3, global processing
and local processing were induced by temporal distance that was
introduced after the comparison stage and thus could not have
influenced whether similarities or differences were sought out in
the comparison process. The finding of assimilation versus contrast in this study thus suggests that a process other than selective
activation of similarities versus differences is operating and that it
operates at the comparison stage rather than at the information
activation stage. In short, our results suggest that selective accessibility only partly explains the effect of global versus local processing on assimilation versus contrast.
Whereas SAM focuses on information search and the different
information that produces assimilation versus contrast, ICM and
REM focus on differential use of the same information as a basis
for assimilation versus contrast effects. ICM (Stapel, 2007) suggests that assimilation is a result of an interpretation process
(whereby a standard is used to interpret the target), whereas

contrast is a result of a comparison process (whereby a target is
compared with the standard). In a similar vein, REM (Markman &
McMullen, 2003) suggests that assimilation is the result of applying a reflective processing style, in which the target is imagined in
a standard-consistent situation (e.g., a person imagines that she is
Albert Einstein), whereas contrast results from applying an evaluative mode of thinking. Both ICM and REM suggest that the
same accessible information may produce both assimilation (if it is
used to interpret the target) or contrast (if it is used to compare the
target). GLOMO, just like IEM, incorporates both differences in
accessible input and differences in processing the same input as
potential causes of assimilation versus contrast.
Is it possible that an interpretative mode of thinking profits from
a global processing style, whereas a comparing mode of thinking
profits from local processing? Is it possible that modes of thinking
mediated the effect of processing style on assimilation versus
contrast? Further research is needed to examine these questions.
GLOMO can also integrate REM’s suggestion that factual
knowledge is not the only basis for assimilation and contrast
effects. Rather, it is possible that assimilation ensues from engaging in “as if” simulations that have little factual basis. A person
could imagine herself as being Steffi Graf and thus could overestimate her own athletic skills. We could speculate that it is possible
that reflective modes of thinking and simulations profit from a
global processing style, whereas evaluative modes profit from
local processing. Further research is needed to examine such
relations.
Another important difference between GLOMO and other models is that processing style may apply to the prime or standard of
comparison, as well as to the target of comparison. Therefore, local
versus global processing may affect the way people process the
prime or the comparison standard, even before they encounter any
target. Contrary to this notion, SAM, ICM, and REM refer to the
target or to its relation to the comparison standard. These models
cannot be applied to a situation in which a target has not yet been
presented. For example, consider a situation in which participants
are asked to think about Robbie Williams’ drug and alcohol
consumption. We believe that a global processing style (relative to
a local processing style) would make it more likely that participants represent Robbie Williams in terms of a relevant general
category (e.g., “He is a pop singer; pop singers often take drugs”)
as opposed to remembering specific incidents in his career (e.g., “I
saw his show on TV last month; he must have taken drugs before
it”). All aforementioned models, however, are silent with respect
to processing the comparison standard that occurs before any
comparison target is presented. Notably, Experiment 1 showed that
processing styles affected assimilation and contrast in the absence
of any comparison process. In that way, GLOMO seems to have a
wider range of application than SAM, ICM, or REM.

Conclusion
The question of when primes or comparison standards produce
assimilation and when they produce contrast is of central importance in social psychology. Our studies showed that global processing enhances assimilation, whereas local processing enhances
contrast. For example, when participants were induced with global
processing by looking at global letters, they indicated that they
consumed more drugs and alcohol after being presented with a

EFFECT OF PROCESSING STYLE ON SOCIAL JUDGMENT

high standard of drug and alcohol consumption (Robbie Williams)
than after being presented with a low standard (Steffi Graf).
However, after participants were induced with local processing by
looking at the local letters, the reverse pattern emerged, giving rise
to a contrast effect. These variations in self-descriptions may have
vast implications for real life: For example, doctors and therapists
who rely upon their clients’ and patients’ self-descriptions should
be aware of the fact that certain narrowing and broadening of
perspectives can lead to systematic biases in self-reports. In a
similar vein, polling and survey research may be affected by
diverse processing styles that bias reports in an unwanted way.
Changes in categorization due to global versus local processing
styles may affect behavior as well. A person who includes chimpanzees into the category of human beings may demand human
rights for this species, and a person that thinks of himself as a
mammal rather than a human being may consider not eating
members of that category and may become a vegetarian. Furthermore, from an experimental point of view, it may be interesting to
examine whether behavioral assimilation effects would be more
likely to occur when people are in a global processing mode.
Would people in a global processing mode walk slower after being
primed with the stereotype of an older person (indicating assimilation toward the stereotype), and would they walk faster (indicating contrast away from the stereotype) when in a local processing
mode (Bargh, Chen, & Burrows, 1996)? We hope that the moderator we examined thus broadens the perspective of research on
assimilation and contrast in social judgment to other important
areas of research.

References
Anderson, M. C., & Neely, J. H. (1996). Interference and inhibition in
memory retrieval. In E. L. Bjork and R. A. Bjork (Eds.), Memory (pp.
237–313). San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Bargh, J. A., Chen, M., & Burrows, L. (1996). Automaticity of social
behavior: Direct effects of trait construct and stereotype activation on
action. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 71, 230 –244.
Bargh, J. A., & Gollwitzer, P. M. (1994). Environmental control of goaldirected action: Automatic and strategic contingencies between situations and behavior. In W. Spaulding (Ed.), Nebraska Symposium on
Motivation: Vol. 41. Integrative views of motivation, cognition, and
emotion (pp. 71–124). Lincoln, NE: University of Nebraska Press.
Baron, R. M., & Kenny, D. A. (1986). The moderator–mediator variable
distinction in social psychological-research: Conceptual, strategic, and
statistical considerations. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
51, 1173–1182.
Barsalou, L. W. (1999). Perceptual symbol systems. Behavioral and Brain
Sciences, 22, 577– 609.
Basso, M. R., Schefft, B. K., Ris, M. D., & Dember, W. N. (1996). Mood
and global-local visual processing. Journal of the International Neuropsychological Society, 2, 249 –255.
Baxter, L. R., Phelps, M. E., Mazziotta, J. C., Guze, B. H., Schwartz, J. M.,
& Selin, C. E. (1987). Local cerebral glucose metabolic rates in
obsessive– compulsive disorder: A comparison with rates in unipolar
depression and in normal controls. Archives of General Psychiatry, 44,
211–218.
Beeman, M. (1998). Coarse semantic coding and discourse comprehension.
In M. Beeman and C. Chiarello (Eds.), Right hemisphere language
comprehension: Perspectives from cognitive neuroscience (pp. 255–
284). Mawah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Biernat, M., & Manis, M. (2007). Stereotypes and shifting standards:
Assimilation and contrast in social judgment. In D. A. Stapel & J. Suls

597

(Eds.): Assimilation and contrast in social psychology (pp. 75–97). New
York: Psychological Press.
Bisiach, E., Geminiani, G., Berti, A., & Rusconi, M. L. (1990). Perceptual
and premotor factors of unilateral neglect. Neurology, 40, 1278 –1281.
Blanton, H. (2001). Evaluating the self in the context of another: Assimilation and contrast effects in social comparison. In G. Moskowitz (Ed.),
Cognitive social psychology: The Princeton Symposium and the legacy
and future of social cognition (pp. 75– 88). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Bowers, D., & Heilman, K. M. (1980). Pseudoneglect: Effects of hemispace on a tactile line bisection task. Neuropsychologia, 18, 491– 498.
Bradshaw, J. L., Nathan, G., Nettleton, N. C., Wilson, L., & Pierson, J.
(1987). Why is there a left side underestimation in rod bisection?
Neuropsychologia, 25, 735–738.
Buchsbaum, M. S., Hazlett, E., Sicotte, N., Stein, M., Wu, J., & Zetin, M.
(1985). Topographic EEG changes with benzodiazepine administration
in generalized anxiety disorder. Biological Psychiatry, 20, 832– 842.
Burgess, C., & Simpson, G. B. (1988). Cerebral hemispheric mechanisms
in the retrieval of ambiguous word meanings. Brain and Language, 33,
86 –103.
Cacioppo, J. T., Priester, J. R., & Berntson, G. G. (1993). Rudimentary
determinants of attitudes: II. Arm flexion and extension have differential
effects on attitudes. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 65,
5–17.
DeCoster, J., & Claypool, H. M. (2004). A meta-analysis of priming effects
on impression formation supporting a general model of informational
biases. Personality and Social Psychology Review, 8, 2–27.
Delis, D. C., Robertson, L. C., & Efron, R. (1986). Hemispheric specialization of memory for visual hierarchical stimuli. Neuropsychologia, 24,
205–214.
Derryberry, D., & Reed, M. A. (1998). Anxiety and attentional focusing:
Trait, state, and hemispheric influences. Personality and Individual
Differences, 25, 745–761.
Derryberry, D., & Tucker, D. M. (1994). Motivating the focus of attention.
In P. M. Niedenthal & S. Kitayama (Eds.), Heart’s eye: Emotional
influences in perception and attention (pp. 167–196). New York: Academic Press.
DeSteno, D., & Salovey, P. (1997). Structural dynamism in the concept of
self: A flexible model for a malleable concept. Review of General
Psychology, 1, 389 – 409.
Dijksterhuis, A., Spears, R., Postmes, T., Stapel, D. A., Koomen, W., Van
Knippenberg, A., et al. (1998). Seeing one thing and doing another:
Contrast effects in automatic behavior. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 75, 862– 871.
Dodson, C. S., Johnson, M. K., & Schooler, J. W. (1997). The verbal
overshadowing effect: Why descriptions impair face recognition. Memory & Cognition, 25, 129 –139.
Epstein, S., Lipson, A., Holstein, C., & Huh, E. (1992). Irrational reactions
to negative outcomes: Evidence for two conceptual systems. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 62, 328–339.
Fink, G. R., Halligan, P. W., Marshall, J. C., Frith, C. D., Frackowiak,
R. S., & Dolan, R. J. (1996). Where in the brain does visual attention
select the forest and the trees? Nature, 382, 626 – 628.
Finke, R. A. (1985). Theories relating mental imagery to perception.
Psychological Bulletin, 98, 236 –259.
Fiore, S. M., & Schooler, J. W. (1998). Right hemisphere contributions to
creative problem solving: Converging evidence for divergent thinking.
In M. Beeman & C. Chiarello (Eds.), Right hemisphere language comprehension: Perspectives from cognitive neuroscience (pp. 349 –371).
Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Fishbach, A., & Förster, J. (2006). Broadening and narrowing the self by
global vs. local processing. Unpublished data set, University of Chicago
School of Business, Chicago, IL.
Förster, J. (2004). How body feedback influences consumers’ evaluations
of products. Journal of Consumer Psychology, 14, 416 – 426.

598

FÖRSTER, LIBERMAN, AND KUSCHEL

Förster, J. (2007a). How global versus local processing influences similarity and dissimilarity search. Manuscript submitted for publication.
Förster, J. (2007b). The influence of approach and avoidance on assimilation and contrast in social judgment. Manuscript in preparation.
Förster, J., & Friedman, R. S. (2006). How regulatory focus influences
assimilation and contrast effects in social judgments. Manuscript submitted for publication.
Förster, J., Friedman, R. S., Özelsel, A., & Denzler, M. (2006). Enactment
of approach and avoidance behavior influences the scope of perceptual
and conceptual attention. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology,
42, 133–146.
Förster, J., Friedman, R. S., & Liberman, N. (2004). Temporal construal
effects on abstract and concrete thinking: Consequences for insight and
creative cognition. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 87,
177–189.
Förster, J., & Higgins, E. T. (2005). How global versus local perception fits
regulatory focus. Psychological Science, 16, 631– 636.
Förster, J. & Liberman, N. (in press). Knowledge activation. In E. T.
Higgins & A. W. Kruglanski (Eds.), Social psychology: Handbook of
basic principles (2nd ed.). New York: Guilford.
Förster, J., Liberman, N., & Higgins, E. T. (2005). Accessibility from
active and fulfilled goals. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology,
41, 220 –239.
Förster, J., & Strack, F. (1997). Motor actions in retrieval of valenced
information: A motor congruence effect. Perceptual and Motor Skills,
85, 1419 –1427.
Förster, J., & Strack, F. (1998). Motor actions in retrieval of valenced
information: II. Boundary conditions for motor congruence effect. Perceptual and Motor Skills, 86, 1423–1426.
Friedman, R., Fishbach, A., Förster, J., & Werth, L. (2003). Attentional
priming effects on creativity. Creativity Research Journal, 15, 277–286.
Friedman, R. S., & Förster, J. (2002). The influence of approach and
avoidance motor actions on creative cognition. Journal of Experimental
Social Psychology, 38, 41–55.
Friedman, R. S., & Förster, J. (2005). Effects of motivational cues on
perceptual asymmetry: Implications for creativity and analytical problem solving. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 88, 263–
275.
Friedman, R., & Förster, J. (in press). Activation and measurement of
motivational states. In A. J. Elliott (Ed.), Handbook of approach and
avoidance motivation. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Fujita, K., Henderson, M. D., Eng, J., Trope, Y., & Liberman, N. (2006).
Spatial distance and mental construal of social events. Psychological
Science, 17, 278 –282.
Gasper, K. (2004). Do you see what I see? Affect and visual information
processing. Cognition & Emotion, 18, 405– 421.
Gasper, K., & Clore, G. (2002). Attending to the big picture: Mood and
global versus local processing of visual information. Psychological
Science, 13, 34 – 40.
Gilbert, D. T. (1991). How mental systems believe. American Psychologist, 46, 107–119.
Henderson, M. D., Fujita, K., Trope, Y., & Liberman, N. (2006). Transcending the “here”: The effect of spacial distance on social judgment.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 91, 845– 856.
Herr, P. M. (1986). Consequences of priming: Judgment and behavior.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 51, 1106 –1115.
Herr, P. M., Sherman, S. J., & Fazio, R. H. (1983). On the consequences
of priming: Assimilation and contrast effects. Journal of Experimental
Social Psychology, 19, 323–340.
Higgins, E. T. (1996). Knowledge activation: Accessibility, applicability,
and salience. In E. T. Higgins & A. W. Kruglanski (Eds.), Social
psychology: Handbook of basic principles (pp. 133–168). New York:
Guilford.
Higgins, E. T. (2000). Beyond pleasure and pain. In E. T. Higgins and

A. W. Kruglanski (Eds.), Motivational science: Social and personality
perspectives (pp. 231–255). Philadelphia: Taylor & Francis.
Higgins, E. T., Rholes, W. S., & Jones, C. R. (1977). Category accessibility
and impression formation. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology,
13, 141–154.
Idson, L. C., & Mischel, W. (2001). The personality of familiar and
significant people: The lay perceiver as a social-cognitive theorist.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 80, 585–596.
Isen, A. M., & Daubman, K. A. (1984). The influence of affect on
categorization. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 47, 1206 –
1217.
Kühnen, U., & Oyserman, D. (2002). Thinking about the self influences
thinking in general: Cognitive consequences of salient self-concept.
Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 38, 492– 499.
Lamb, M. R., & Robertson, L. C. (1990). The effect of visual angle on
global and local reaction times depends on the set of visual angles
presented. Perception & Psychophysics, 47, 489 – 496.
Liberman, N., & Förster, J. (2007). How psychological distance relates to
global versus local perception. Manuscript in preparation.
Liberman, N., Förster, J., & Higgins, E. T. (2007). Set/reset or inhibition
after goal fulfillment? A fair test between two mechanisms producing
assimilation and contrast. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology,
43, 258 –264.
Liberman, N., Sagristano, M. D., & Trope, Y. (2002). The effect of
temporal distance on level of mental construal. Journal of Experimental
Social Psychology, 38, 523–534.
Liberman, N., & Trope, Y. (1998). The role of feasibility and desirability
considerations in near and distant future decisions: A test of temporal
construal theory. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 75,
5–18.
Liberman, N., Trope, Y., & Stephan, E. (2007). Psychological distance. In
A. W. Kruglanski & E. T. Higgins (Eds.), Social psychology: Handbook
of basic principles (2nd ed., pp. 353–383). New York: Guilford.
Lombardi, W. J., Higgins, E. T., & Bargh, J. A. (1987). The role of
consciousness in priming effects on categorization: Assimilation versus
contrast as a function of awareness of the priming task. Personality and
Social Psychology Bulletin, 13, 411– 429.
Luu, P., Tucker, D. M., & Derryberry, D. (1998). Anxiety and the motivational basis of working memory. Cognitive Therapy and Research, 22,
577–594.
Macrae, C. N., & Lewis, H. L. (2002). Do I know you? Processing
orientation and face recognition. Psychological Science, 13, 194 –196.
Manis, M., Nelson, T. E., & Shelder, J. (1988). Stereotypes and social
judgment: Extremity, assimilation, and contrast. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 55, 28 –36.
Markman, A. D., & Gentner, D. (1996). Commonalities and differences in
similarity comparisons. Memory & Cognition, 24, 235–249.
Markman, K., & McMullen, M. (2003). A reflection and evaluation model
of comparative thinking. Personality and Social Psychology Review, 7,
244 –267.
Markus, H., & Kunda, Z. (1986). Stability and malleability of the selfconcept. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 51, 858 – 866.
Martin, L. L. (1986). Set/reset: Use and disuse of concepts in impression
formation. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 51, 493–504.
Martin, L. L., Shrira, I., & Startup, H. (in press). Rumination as a function
of goal progress, stop-rules, and cerebral lateralization. In C. Papageorgiou and A. Wells (Eds.), Depressive rumination: Nature, theory, and
treatment. New York: Wiley.
Masson, M. E. (1995). A distributed memory model of semantic priming.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 21, 3–23.
Mikulincer, M., Kedem, P., & Paz, D. (1990). Anxiety and categorization:
1. The structure and boundaries of mental categories. Personality and
Individual Differences, 11, 805– 814.

EFFECT OF PROCESSING STYLE ON SOCIAL JUDGMENT
Mikulincer, M., Paz, D., & Kedem, P. (1990). Anxiety and categorization:
2. Hierarchical levels of mental categories. Personality and Individual
Differences, 11, 815– 821.
Milner, A. D., Brechmann, M., & Pagliarini, L. (1992). To halve and to
halve not: An analysis of line bisection in normal subjects. Neuropsychologia, 30, 515–526.
Morton, B. E. (2003). Two-hand line-bisection task outcomes correlate
with several measures of hemisphericity. Brain and Cognition, 51,
305–316.
Mussweiler, T. (2001). “Seek and ye shall find”: Antecedents of assimilation and contrast in social comparison. European Journal of Social
Psychology, 31, 499 –509.
Mussweiler, T. (2003). Comparison processes in social judgment: Mechanisms and consequences. Psychological Review, 110, 472– 489.
Mussweiler, T., & Bodenhausen, G. (2002). I know you are, but what am
I? Self-evaluative consequences of judging ingroup and outgroup members. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 82, 19 –32.
Mussweiler, T., & Förster, J. (2000). The sex –⬎ aggression link: A
perception– behavior dissociation. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 79, 507–520.
Mussweiler, T., Rüter, K., & Epstude, K. (2004). The man who wasn’t
there: Subliminal social standards influence self-evaluation. Journal of
Experimental Social Psychology, 40, 689 – 696.
Mussweiler, T., & Strack, F. (2000). The “relative self”: Informational and
judgmental consequences of comparative self-evaluation. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 79, 23–38.
Navon, D. (1977). Forest before trees: The precedence of global features in
visual perception. Cognitive Psychology, 9, 353–383.
Neumann, R., & Strack, F. (2000). Approach and avoidance: The influence
of proprioceptive and exteroceptive cues on encoding of affective information. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 79, 39 – 48.
Parducci, A. (1965). Category judgment: A range–frequency model. Psychological Review, 72, 407– 418.
Parducci, A., Perrett, D. S., & Marsh, H. W. (1969). Assimilation and
contrast as range–frequency effects of anchors. Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 81, 281–288.
Peterson, C. (2000). The future of optimism. American Psychologist, 55,
44 –55.
Priester, J. R., Cacioppo, J. T., & Petty, R. E. (1996). The influence of
motor processes on attitudes toward novel versus familiar semantic
stimuli. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 22, 442– 447.
Schooler, J. W. (2002). Verbalization produces a transfer-inappropriate
processing shift. Applied Cognitive Psychology, 16, 989 –997.
Schwarz, N., & Bless, H. (1992). Constructing reality and its alternatives:
An inclusion/exclusion model of assimilation and contrast effects in
social judgment. In L. L. Martin and A. Tesser (Eds.), The construction
of social judgments (pp. 217–245). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Schwarz, N., & Bless, H. (2007). Mental construal processes: The inclusion/exclusion model. In D. A. Stapel & J. Suls (Eds.), Assimilation and
contrast in social psychology (pp. 119 –142). New York: Psychological
Press.
Sherif, M., & Hovland, C. I. (1961). Social judgment: Assimilation and
contrast effects in communication and attitude change. New Haven, CT:
Yale University Press.
Srull, T. K., & Wyer, R. S., Jr. (1979). The role of category accessibility
in the interpretation of information about persons: Some determinants
and implications. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 37,
1660 –1672.
Srull, T. K., & Wyer, R. S., Jr. (1980). Category accessibility and social
perception: Some implications for the study of person memory and

599

interpersonal judgments. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
38, 841– 856.
Stapel, D. A. (2007). In the mind of the beholder: The interpretation
comparison model of accessibility effects. In D. A. Stapel & J. Suls
(Eds.), Assimilation and contrast in social psychology (pp. 143–164).
New York: Psychological Press.
Stapel, D. A., & Blanton, H. (2004). From seeing to being: Subliminal
social comparisons affect implicit and explicit self-evaluations. Journal
of Personality and Social Psychology, 87, 468 – 481.
Stapel, D. A., & Koomen, W. (1998). When stereotype activation results in
(counter)stereotypical judgments: Priming stereotype-relevant traits and
exemplars. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 34, 136 –163.
Stapel, D. A., & Koomen, W. (2000). Distinctness of others and malleability of selves: Their impact on social comparison effects. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 79, 1068 –1087.
Stapel, D. A., & Koomen, W. (2001). I, we, and the effects of others on me:
How self-construal moderates social comparison effects. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 80, 766 –781.
Stapel, D. A., Koomen, W., & Van der Pligt, J. (1996). The referents of
trait inferences: The impact of trait concepts versus actor–trait links on
subsequent judgments. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
70, 437– 450.
Stapel, D. A., Koomen, W., & Van der Pligt (1997). Categories of category
accessibility: The impact of trait versus exemplar priming on person
judgments. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 33, 44 –76.
Stapel, D. A., & Suls, J. (2004). Method matters: Effects of explicit versus
implicit social comparisons on activation, behavior, and self-views.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 87, 860 – 875.
Stephan, E., Liberman, N., & Trope, Y. (2007). Politeness and its relation
to psychological distancing. Manuscript submitted for publication.
Strack, F., & Mussweiler, T. (1997). Explaining the enigmatic anchoring
effect: Mechanisms of selective accessibility. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 73, 437– 446.
Trope, Y., & Liberman, N. (2003). Temporal construal. Psychological
Review, 110, 403– 421.
Tucker, D. M., Antes, J. R., Stenslie, C. E., & Barnhardt, T. M. (1978).
Anxiety and lateral cerebral function. Journal of Abnormal Psychology,
87, 380 –383.
Tucker, D. M., & Williamson, P. A. (1984). Asymmetric neural control
systems in human self-regulation. Psychological Review, 91, 185–215.
Tyler, S. K., & Tucker, D. M. (1982). Anxiety and perceptual structure:
Individual differences in neuropsychological function. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 91, 210 –220.
Wakslak, C. J., Trope, Y., & Liberman, N. (2006). Transcending the now:
Time as a dimension of psychological distance. In J. Glicksohn and
M. S. Myslobodsky (Eds.). Timing the future: The case for a time-based
prospective memory (pp. 171–189). Hackensack, NJ: World Scientific.
Ward, T. B. (1995). What’s old about new ideas? In S. M. Smith, T. B.
Ward, and R. A. Finke (Eds.), The creative cognition approach (pp.
157–178). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Weinstein, N. D. (1980). Unrealistic optimism about future life events.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 39, 806 – 820.
Yovel, I., Revelle, W., & Mineka, S. (2005). Who sees trees before forest?
The obsessive– compulsive style of visual attention. Psychological Science, 16, 123–129.

Received December 12, 2006
Revision received September 26, 2007
Accepted September 30, 2007 䡲

