PERSONALITY PROCESSES AND INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES

Not So Innocent: Does Seeing One’s Own Capability for Wrongdoing
Predict Forgiveness?
Julie Juola Exline

Roy F. Baumeister and Anne L. Zell

Case Western Reserve University

Florida State University

Amy J. Kraft

Charlotte V. O. Witvliet

Arizona State University

Hope College

People are more forgiving toward transgressors if they see themselves as capable of committing similar
offenses, as demonstrated in 7 studies. Methods included hypothetical scenarios, actual recalled offenses,
individual and group processes, and correlational and experimental designs. Three factors mediated the
link between personal capability and forgiveness: seeing the other’s offense as less severe, greater
empathic understanding, and perceiving oneself as similar to the transgressor. In terms of predicting
forgiveness, it was important that people’s own offenses were similar to the target offense in terms of
both severity and type. The personal capability effect was independent of other established predictors of
forgiveness and was more pronounced among men than women.
Keywords: forgiveness, vengefulness, humility, empathy, gender

1997); and when offenses occur within close, committed relationships (Finkel, Rusbult, Kumashiro, & Hannon, 2002; Karremans,
Van Lange, Ouwerkerk, & Kluwer, 2003). One means of facilitating these positive perceptions and feelings might be to focus on
one’s own potential for a similar misdeed. Our central hypothesis
was that people would show greater forgiveness to the extent that
they could recall or envision themselves committing similar offenses. This article presents seven studies to test this hypothesis.

Forgiveness can be a powerful means to heal emotions and
relationships after a transgression (see Worthington, 2005a, for a
review), and it may also promote physical health (e.g., Lawler et
al., 2003; Witvliet, 2001, 2005; Witvliet & McCullough, 2007;
Worthington & Scherer, 2004). In spite of its potential benefits,
however, forgiving can be costly in terms of pride and immediate
self-interest (Exline & Baumeister, 2000). Forgiveness requires
that people forego bitter feelings and desires for vengeance (Enright & Fitzgibbons, 2000), perhaps even replacing them with
positive emotions (Worthington, 2005b). The process of forgiving
can be a strenuous one, especially in cases of deep hurt.
People are most likely to forgive when certain conditions are
met: when offenses are minor (Boon & Sulsky, 1997; Zechmeister
& Romero, 2002); when offended parties cultivate empathic feelings toward their offenders (Fincham, Paleari, & Regalia, 2002;
McCullough et al., 1998; McCullough, Worthington, & Rachal,

Self-Enhancement as a Response to Transgression
When faced with violations of social rules, one common response
is to make judgments, asking the following: How serious is this
offense? Should the offender be punished? Is forgiveness conceivable? Unfortunately, objective and dispassionate appraisals of transgressions may be relatively rare and difficult. Cognitive judgments are
often clouded by emotion (Haidt, 2001), and emotion can be intense
in the wake of transgression. As described by Goffman (1955), people
who offend others push them down in symbolic terms, treating them
with disrespect. To combat their feelings of rage and shame, victims
typically feel a need to reestablish a position of strength and safety,
and they often want to punish wrongdoers as well (Darley & Pittman,
2003; Tripp, Bies, & Aquino, 2002).
In cognitive terms, one way to accomplish both goals might be
to see oneself as righteous and innocent while viewing the offending party as morally inferior: “I would never do anything so
horrible!” Downward comparison, which involves comparing oneself to others who are faring worse, is a recognized method of
bolstering the self (Wills, 1981; Wood, Taylor, & Lichtman,

Julie Juola Exline, Department of Psychology, Case Western Reserve
University; Roy F. Baumeister and Anne L. Zell, Department of Psychology, Florida State University; Amy J. Kraft, Department of Psychology,
Arizona State University; Charlotte V. O. Witvliet, Department of Psychology, Hope College.
Anne L. Zell is now at the Department of Psychology, Augustana College.
Julie Juola Exline and Roy F. Baumeister are grateful for the generous
support of the John Templeton Foundation (Grant 5039).
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Julie
Juola Exline, Department of Psychology, Case Western Reserve University, 10900 Euclid Avenue, Cleveland, OH 44106-7123. E-mail:
julie.exline@case.edu

Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 2008, Vol. 94, No. 3, 495–515
Copyright 2008 by the American Psychological Association 0022-3514/08/$12.00
DOI: 10.1037/0022-3514.94.3.495

495

496

EXLINE, BAUMEISTER, ZELL, KRAFT, AND WITVLIET

1985). Particularly when feeling threatened, people may derogate
others to turn them into targets of downward comparison (Gibbons
& Gerrard, 1991). By focusing on the contrast between one’s own
qualities (or actions) and those of the offending party, the evaluator
can enjoy the comforts of self-enhancement while creating a safe
sense of moral distance from the offender.
How might self-enhancing comparisons affect attitudes toward
an offender? One likely consequence is that the offender’s misdeeds will seem to grow in size. When people adopt a victim’s
perspective, they often exaggerate the severity of the offense
(Baumeister, Stillwell, & Wotman, 1990). Such biases can be so
strong that people may be unable to override them even if given
strong incentives, such as monetary compensation (Stillwell &
Baumeister, 1997). Adopting a victim stance might also promote
the demonization of offenders (Ellard, Miller, Baumle, & Olson,
2002), whose acts are viewed as monstrous and inexplicable.
People often understand transgressions on the basis of what
Baumeister (1997) termed the myth of pure evil, a belief that those
who commit serious offenses are rotten to the core—and fundamentally different from good people such as oneself.
Self-enhancing strategies may benefit offended parties by helping them to feel safe, strong, and morally good. But if people
create a sense of moral distance between themselves and their
offenders, how might such a stance affect decisions about forgiveness? If people demonize their offenders and see their actions as
being rooted in pure evil, it seems likely that their responses will
center on self-protection or retribution rather than forgiveness.

Reflecting on One’s Personal Capability for Similar Offenses
To understand how people move from grudge holding to forgiveness, we believe that it is crucial to identify alternatives to the
processes of demonization and distancing that commonly occur in
response to an offense. One possibility is that people might reflect on
their own capability for committing similar offenses—a perception
that we term personal capability throughout this article. Our main
hypothesis is that personal capability will prove to be a robust predictor of forgiveness. Why? We propose three possible mechanisms.

Reduced Perceptions of Severity
If people can see themselves as capable of committing a particular offense, the offense may seem to shrink, becoming less severe.
People tend to perceive and recall their own offenses in a mitigated
manner, downplaying their severity and consequences (Baumeister, 1997; Baumeister et al., 1990; Stillwell & Baumeister, 1997).
With a perspective that says, “If I’m capable of doing it, it must not
be that bad,” victims may be more likely to forgive.

Enhanced Empathic Understanding
Victims often see the actions of perpetrators as inexplicable or
rooted in sheer malice (Baumeister et al., 1990), a stance that
hardly seems conducive to forgiveness. But if people can relate the
offense to their own behavior, doing so may facilitate understanding. As victims reflect on their own similar transgressions, they
may notice sensible and perhaps justifiable reasons for their behavior. They may, in turn, extend that understanding to the present
perpetrators—thereby making the offense seem more forgivable.

Enhanced Sense of Similarity
Identifying with an offender, even in a minimal way, should
help to break down psychological barriers that people erect to
distance themselves. Focusing on themes of common humanity
can facilitate forgiveness (Wohl & Branscombe, 2005). Seeing the
similarities between oneself and an offender is also likely to be
humbling, and humility should work against a self-righteous, judgmental mindset that distances the perpetrator from the victim
(Exline, Campbell, et al., 2004; Tangney, 2000, 2002).

Relevant Findings From Prior Research: Forgiveness and
Empathy
As described above, we proposed that personal capability would
predict forgiveness through several distinct pathways. Two of
these pathways— deepened understanding of the other’s offense
and a sense of similarity to the offender—involve processes related
to empathy. Many studies have revealed positive associations
between empathy and forgiveness (e.g., Brown, 2003; Fincham et
al., 2002; Konstam, Chernoff, & Deveney, 2001; Macaskill,
Maltby, & Day, 2002; McCullough et al., 1997, 1998; Toussaint &
Webb, 2005; Zechmeister & Romero, 2002). Treatment models of
forgiveness by Enright and Fitzgibbons (2000) and Worthington
(1998) also include a focus on one’s own offenses (see also
Malcolm, Warwar, & Greenberg, 2005).
Most of the studies in this area have framed empathy as a disposition (Brown, 2003; Konstam et al., 2001; Macaskill et al., 2002;
Toussaint & Webb, 2005) or in emotional terms, tapping feelings of
warmth or sympathy (Fincham et al., 2002; McCullough et al., 1997,
1998). Researchers have devoted less attention to the cognitive,
perspective-taking aspect of empathy that would take place in relation
to a specific offense, and it is this more cognitive aspect of empathy
that seems most relevant to personal capability.
Several forgiveness researchers note the lack of attention to
cognitive facets of empathy (McCullough et al., 1997; Toussaint &
Webb, 2005). Although McCullough et al. (1997) did include a
cognitive measure, results from that measure were inconclusive,
and subsequent studies focused on emotional empathy (McCullough et al., 1998). Brown (2003) found that dispositional forgiveness correlated positively with the cognitive, perspective-taking
facet of empathy. However, the perspective-taking measure used
was dispositional rather than situation specific.
Witvliet, Ludwig, and Vander Laan (2001) compared the effects of
an empathic perspective-taking manipulation with conditions involving forgiveness, rumination, and grudge holding. The empathy condition had a cognitive emphasis, asking participants to focus on the
humanity of the offender, factors in the offender’s life that may have
contributed to the offense, and/or times when the participants themselves had needed to be forgiven. Compared with the rumination and
grudge-holding conditions, empathic perspective taking significantly
reduced anger, arousal, and negative emotion as well as heart rate,
blood pressure, sweat, and brow electromyography. Empathy also
increased perceived control, pleasant relaxation, and joy. Yet, in terms
of facilitating positive emotion and reducing negative emotion and
arousal, the forgiveness manipulation was even more effective than
the empathy manipulation.
The closest empirical precedent for our work on personal capability comes from several scenario-based experiments. Takaku

NOT SO INNOCENT

(2001) and Takaku, Weiner, and Ohbuchi (2001) found that perspective taking (asking participants to recall prior offenses of their
own) made participants more likely than controls to accept imaginary apologies from hypothetical offenders. Although clearly
relevant to our ideas about personal capability, these studies had a
circumscribed focus: They emphasized hypothetical situations in
which apologies were being offered.
In summary, prior research on empathy and forgiveness provided some empirical backing for the hypothesized connection
between personal capability and forgiveness. Our aim here was to
perform a much more systematic and intensive examination of the
proposed connection, including tests of the three proposed mediators, consideration of potential confounds, and use of both interpersonal and intergroup offenses. The use of experimental designs
also allowed us to examine several important boundary conditions,
which we describe next.

497

Men were less aggressive in response to the betrayal if they had
written about a time when they felt humble (vs. proud or important). Women did not show this pattern. Another recent study
found that within married couples, emotional empathy was a
stronger predictor of forgiveness by husbands than by wives (Fincham et al., 2002). Likewise, a questionnaire study found that
dispositional empathy predicted forgiveness by men but not by
women (Toussaint & Webb, 2005).
Granted, the above findings had only indirect relevance to our
work. Our interest was in personal capability, a situation-specific
construct with a cognitive emphasis. We were not studying humility, emotional empathy, or dispositional empathy. Nonetheless, the
prior findings suggested that gender might moderate the effects of
humbling or empathic processing in ways relevant to personal
capability. Specifically, they raised the possibility that reflecting
on one’s own misdeeds might facilitate forgiveness more among
men than among women.

Possible Pitfalls of Focusing on One’s Own Offenses
Even if seeing one’s own capability for wrongdoing is associated with forgiveness (in correlational terms), does it follow that
prompting people to focus on their own offenses will promote
forgiveness? It might, if such self-reflection facilitates the kinds of
empathic, humbling, and offense-diminishing processes described
earlier. But it also seems possible that being asked to reflect on
one’s own misdeeds could backfire. First, a person might recall an
offense of a very different type (e.g., an academic cheating situation as opposed to an ethnic slur). Any subsequent comparisons
may not facilitate understanding of the target offense because the
two situations are so different. Second, because of the prevalence
of self-enhancement motives (e.g., Sedikides & Strube, 1997), it
seems likely that many people would recall offenses that are less
severe than the target offense. Seeing one’s own offense as less
severe could lead to a contrast effect, magnifying the other’s
offense rather than diminishing it. To facilitate forgiveness, then,
it may be important for people to recall offenses that are truly
similar to the target in terms of both severity and type. We
examined these issues in Studies 5 and 6.
A second problem is that reflecting on one’s own offenses could
bring up self-focused negative emotions. Earlier studies have
shown that asking people to recall humbling situations can prompt
feelings of shame and weakness. These self-focused negative
emotions, in turn, can make people less generous (Exline & Fisher,
2005) and more aggressive (Exline & Zell, 2006). Simply being in
a bad mood could make people harsh in their judgments. If people
also feel ashamed and defensive regarding their own offenses, the
resulting desire to repair their self-images might increase the
tendency to derogate others rather than fostering forgiveness. We
examined this possibility in Study 5.

The Potential for Gender Differences
When we launched this line of research, gender was of peripheral interest to us. We tend to err on the side of not focusing on
gender differences unless there is some clear conceptual reason for
doing so (see Baumeister, 1988). However, some recent findings
persuaded us to take a closer look at gender. For example, several
studies examined whether recalling humbling events would affect
responses to betrayal in a laboratory game (Exline & Zell, 2006).

The Present Research
In the studies presented here, our goal was not only to see
whether a link exists between personal capability and forgiveness
but also to examine potential mediators (Study 2) and rule out
other third-variable explanations (Studies 2 and 6). We wanted to
determine whether the pattern was specific to college students
(Study 1) and whether it might generalize to severe intergroup
offenses (Study 3). We also used experimental designs (Studies
4 –7) to examine the effects of having people focus on their
offenses, and we paid particular attention to the possibility of
gender differences in those studies.

Study 1: Comparing Forgiveness and Unforgiveness in
Two Samples
We started with a simple design to test whether forgiven offenses, relative to unforgiven offenses, would be associated with a
higher sense of personal capability. Because generalizability concerns were particularly important to us in this initial study, we used
two samples to test our hypothesis: an undergraduate sample and
a more diverse Internet-based sample.

Method
Participants
Sample 1: Undergraduates. Participants were 148 introductory psychology students (80 men, 68 women) at a private university in the Midwestern United States. All received partial course
credit for completing a survey. The average age was 19 years, and
all participants were single. The sample was predominantly Caucasian (71%) and Asian (16%).1
Sample 2: Internet. Participants in the Internet sample (25
men, 81 women) took a Web-based version of the survey. We sent
a recruitment e-mail to a broad spectrum of individuals, including
instructors teaching psychology courses, colleagues, and acquaintances. After assuring them that all information would be kept
1

Because of space constraints involved in describing seven studies, we
list only those ethnic groups that represent at least 10% of the sample.

498

EXLINE, BAUMEISTER, ZELL, KRAFT, AND WITVLIET

confidential, we invited them to participate and/or to send the
recruitment e-mail to others. The final sample was composed of an
approximately equal number of college students (n ⫽ 56; 49% of
sample) and nonstudents (n ⫽ 59). The mean age was 25.4 (SD ⫽
8.9), and the majority (91%) of participants were from the United
States. The sample was predominantly Caucasian (85%) and African American (11%).

Procedure
Following established procedures (e.g., Boon & Sulsky, 1997;
Darby & Schlenker, 1982; Zechmeister & Romero, 2002), participants were asked to recall two situations in which someone had
hurt or offended them: one in which they forgave and another in
which they did not forgive. The two conditions were counterbalanced to control for order effects. No specific definition of forgiveness was provided. Instead, participants drew on their own
ideas about what forgiveness entailed. After describing the situation, participants completed the following measures.

Measures
Extent of forgiveness. As a manipulation check, participants
were asked, “To what extent have you forgiven this person?” (1 ⫽
not at all, 6 ⫽ totally).
Capability for similar offense. Participants were asked,
“Given the right circumstances, could you see yourself committing
a similar offense to what happened to you (i.e., just as wrong or
damaging)?” (1 ⫽ no, not at all, 6 ⫽ yes, definitely).

Results and Discussion
A manipulation check confirmed that undergraduates reported
more forgiveness in the forgiveness condition (M ⫽ 5.4, SD ⫽ 1.0)
than in the unforgiveness condition (M ⫽ 2.2, SD ⫽ 1.4), t(140) ⫽
23.62, p ⬍ .01, ␩2 ⫽ .80. Internet participants also reported more
forgiveness in the forgiveness condition (M ⫽ 5.0, SD ⫽ 1.2) than
in the unforgiveness condition (M ⫽ 2.1, SD ⫽ 1.4), t(100) ⫽
18.23, p ⬍ .01, ␩2 ⫽ .77.
We predicted that when compared with unforgiveness cases,
forgiveness cases would be associated with a greater sense of one’s
own capability for committing a similar offense. This prediction
was strongly supported in both the undergraduate sample (forgiveness case, M ⫽ 3.0, SD ⫽ 1.6; unforgiveness case, M ⫽ 1.8, SD ⫽
1.8), t(140) ⫽ 6.61, p ⬍ .01, ␩2 ⫽ .24, and the Internet sample
(forgiveness case, M ⫽ 2.4, SD ⫽ 1.7; unforgiveness case, M ⫽
1.5, SD ⫽ 1.2), t(100) ⫽ 4.59, p ⬍ .01, ␩2 ⫽ .17. No significant
interactions were found on the basis of age, gender, nationality,
ethnicity, or student versus nonstudent status.
We also examined correlations between forgiveness and personal capability within each condition. In both samples, personal
capability correlated positively with forgiveness in the unforgiveness case— undergraduate, r(142) ⫽ .23, p ⬍ .01, and Internet,
r(103) ⫽ .22, p ⬍ .05— but not in the forgiveness case—
undergraduate, r(147) ⫽ .10, ns, and Internet, r(110) ⫽ .07, ns.
The nonsignificant associations in the forgiveness case may have
been partly due to ceiling effects. It is also possible that cultivating
a sense of personal capability is particularly relevant early in the

forgiveness process, when the natural tendency is often to demonize one’s offender.
Study 1 offered preliminary evidence for our hypothesis: Relative to cases of unforgiveness, cases of forgiveness involve acts
that people see themselves more capable of committing. This
association applied to both students and nonstudents. Study 1 also
raised the possibility that personal capability predicts forgiveness
mainly in cases in which people still harbor considerable anger
toward their offenders.

Study 2: A Closer Look at the Capability–Forgiveness Link
Study 1 demonstrated a link between personal capability and
forgiveness. Next, we wanted to follow the strategy of a previous
article on narcissistic entitlement and forgiveness (Exline,
Baumeister, et al., 2004). Specifically, we hypothesized that personal capability would still have unique predictive power when
other robust predictors of forgiveness were controlled. First, we
examined situational predictors of forgiveness that were discussed
in the introduction: relationship commitment and apology. We also
examined several individual-difference factors that have been
linked with forgiveness in prior research.
Earlier studies have shown that forgiveness levels correlate with
the Big Five factors of personality, particularly low Neuroticism
and high Agreeableness (e.g., Brown, 2003; McCullough & Hoyt,
2002). Some other forgiveness predictors include high dispositional forgiveness (e.g., Berry, Worthington, O’Connor, Parrott, &
Wade, 2005), high self-esteem (e.g., Miller, 2003), low narcissism
and entitlement (e.g., Brown, 2004; Exline, Baumeister, et al.,
2004), high religiosity (see Worthington, 2005a, for a review), and
high social desirability (e.g., Exline, Baumeister, et al., 2004).
We reasoned that several of these factors might correlate with
personal capability as well. For example, a willingness to focus on
one’s flaws would seem unlikely in narcissistic people or those with
a high sense of entitlement, because they tend to be defensive about
focusing on their faults (e.g., Campbell, Bonacci, Shelton, Exline, &
Bushman, 2004). Competing predictions could be made about selfesteem: Given their positive self-views, people with high self-esteem
could tend to downplay their potential for wrongdoing, much as
narcissists do. However, their basic sense of security and confidence
could enable them to admit shortcomings as well. Neurotic individuals might be highly aware of their personal capability for transgression, given their predispositions to focus on negative information
(John, Donahue, & Kentle, 1991), whereas conscientious people may
carefully monitor their behavior and be quick to notice deviations
from social rules. Because many religions emphasize the need to be
accountable for transgressions, personal capability might correlate
positively with religiosity. Finally, we reasoned that admitting moral
flaws would be negatively linked with social desirability. Because any
of these personality variables might serve as a confound, we examined
whether the link between capability and forgiveness would remain
significant when these factors were controlled.
We also evaluated the three potential mediators of the
capability–forgiveness association outlined in the introduction: If
personal capability is indeed linked with forgiveness, is this because offenses seem smaller when people can relate to them? Or is
the link due to empathic understanding or seeing oneself as similar
to the offender? We predicted that all three mediation explanations
would be supported.

NOT SO INNOCENT

Method

499

Measures of Unforgiveness and Situational Factors

Participants
Participants (106 men, 112 women) were undergraduates in
psychology courses at a private research university in Ohio. Ethnicities were predominantly Caucasian (69%) and Asian/Pacific
Islander (19%). The mean age was 19.3 years (SD ⫽ 3.7). Analyses of dispositional variables used a subset of participants (n ⫽
136; 68 men, 68 women) who had participated in another study
that included an in-depth assessment of personality constructs.

Procedure
All participants completed a questionnaire for partial course
credit. As part of the questionnaire, they were asked to recall a
situation in which another person did something that deeply offended, harmed, or hurt them. After describing the situation, participants completed the measures described below. Participants
included in the dispositional analyses participated in a Web-based
study called “Emotions, Personality and Attitudes” (Exline &
Youngstrom, 2004). They gave written permission to have the
results from the personality study linked with their results from
this study.

Unless otherwise indicated, scales ranged from 0 (not at all) to
10 (extremely). We scored all measures by averaging across items.
Measures are listed below in the order in which they appeared in
the questionnaire. Descriptive statistics appear in Table 1.
Description of offense. First, participants were asked to provide a brief description of the offense. These responses were coded
into various categories as described in the Results.
Offense severity. Participants rated the extent to which the
offense was severe, harmful, wrong, and intentional.
Preoffense relationship closeness. Participants responded to
the items, “How close was your relationship with the other person
before the offense occurred?” and “Prior to the offense, to what
extent were you committed to having a positive relationship with
the other person?”
Apology and amends. Participants rated the extent to which
the other person had accepted responsibility for the offense, apologized, and taken action to repair the situation.
Unforgiveness. We used the 18-item Transgression Related
Interpersonal Motivations Inventory–Revised (TRIM-18-R; McCullough & Hoyt, 2002) to assess current motivations toward the
offender. Participants responded to 18 items on a scale from 1

Table 1
Study 2: Descriptive Statistics and Key Correlations

Descriptive statistic

M

SD

␣

Personal
capability

Unforgiveness
(TRIM)

Expressed
hostility

Expressed
positive
emotion

—
.63**
⫺.45**

—
⫺.51**

—

⫺.53**
⫺.38**
.57**
⫺.58**
⫺.51**

⫺.35**
⫺.11
.35**
⫺.40**
⫺.38**

.34**
.17*
⫺.27**
.41**
.31**

⫺.24**
.12
⫺.13
⫺.01
.03
⫺.38**
⫺.02
⫺.02
⫺.16⫹
⫺.11
⫺.19*
.02

⫺.12
.25**
⫺.07
.03
⫺.04
⫺.20*
.05
.00
⫺.12
⫺.27**
⫺.09
.05

.11
⫺.14
.12
.19*
.09
.27**
.14
.06
.11
.14
.11
.12

Capability and forgiveness
Personal capability
Unforgiveness (TRIM)
Expressed hostility
Expressed positive emotion

4.8
2.5
1.5
0.9

3.2
1.0
1.4
1.2

.93
.88
.87
.89

—
⫺.40**
⫺.30**
.22**

Situational variables
Apology
Preoffense closeness
Offense severity
Perceived similarity to offender
Empathic understanding

3.3
6.9
6.7
⫺1.6
4.1

3.3
2.9
2.0
3.4
2.7

.92
.90
.66
.89

.25**
.05
⫺.43**
.56**
.46**

Dispositional variablesa
Agreeableness
Neuroticism
Openness
Extraversion
Conscientiousness
Forgiveness (disposition)
Narcissism
Psychological entitlement
Self-esteem
Religiosity index
Social desirability
Gender (0 ⫽ male; 1 ⫽ female)

3.7
2.9
3.5
3.2
3.5
3.4
15.0
1.8
30.8
0.0
6.1

0.5
0.6
0.5
0.8
0.6
0.7
6.9
1.5
5.8
0.9
2.8

.80
.85
.83
.91
.83
.84
.84
.89
.91
.81
.69

⫺.13
.03
⫺.03
⫺.21*
⫺.12
.03
⫺.14†
⫺.06
⫺.04
.04
⫺.15⫹
⫺.10

Note. TRIM ⫽ Transgression Related Interpersonal Motivations Inventory.
a
Dispositional variables come from a subset of participants (n ⫽ 136) who completed a personality study.
†
p ⬍ .10. * p ⬍ .05. ** p ⬍ .01.

EXLINE, BAUMEISTER, ZELL, KRAFT, AND WITVLIET

500

(strongly disagree) to 5 (strongly agree). We averaged scores for
the three subscales (Vengefulness, Avoidance, reverse-scored Benevolence) to compute a TRIM score.
Capability for similar wrongdoing. After completing several
pages of additional questions about the offense (not relevant to this
investigation), participants rated responses to four questions from
0 (no, definitely not) to 10 (yes, definitely): “Given the right
circumstances, do you think that you could be capable of doing
something just as bad (i.e., just as harmful or wrong) as what the
other person did?”; “Can you imagine a situation in which you
could do something as bad as what the other person did?”; “Do you
think it’s possible that you could ever do something as bad as what
the other person did?”; and “Thinking back over your entire life,
do you think that you have ever done anything as bad as what the
other person did?”
Perceived similarity to offender. Participants read the prompt,
“Right now, I see myself as being . . .” followed by a scale from
⫺5 (very different from the other person) to 5 (very similar to the
other person).
Empathic understanding. Participants were asked, “To what
extent can you . . .” followed by four prompts: “understand why
the other person acted as s/he did”; “see the situation from the
other person’s perspective”; “see his/her behavior as making
sense;” and “think of valid reasons why s/he acted as s/he did.”
Responses were rated from 0 (not at all) to 10 (totally).
Expressed hostility and positive emotion. As a qualitative
measure of emotion, we asked an open-ended question: “If you
could say something to the other person now, with no fear of how
s/he might respond, what would you like to say?” Two coders rated
responses for hostility and positive emotion from 0 (none) to 5
(intense). Interrater reliability was acceptable (see Table 1), and
responses were averaged across coders.

Measures of Individual Differences
As described above, the 136 participants included in the dispositional analyses completed a Web-based study that included a set
of dispositional measures. Measures included the Big Five (John et
al., 1991), religiosity (Exline, Yali, & Sanderson, 2000), dispositional tendencies to forgive (Berry et al., 2005), psychological
entitlement (Campbell et al., 2004), narcissism (40-item Narcissistic Personality Inventory; Raskin & Terry, 1988), self-esteem
(Rosenberg, 1965), and social desirability (13-item Marlowe–
Crowne; Reynolds, 1982).

Results and Discussion
Descriptive Statistics: Types of Offenses
Before proceeding, we wanted to examine the types of offenses
reported by our undergraduate participants. Two trained raters
coded offenses into categories, with each offense having the possibility of inclusion in multiple categories (e.g., infidelity and
betrayals of trust). Kappas ranged from .80 to 1.0, and differences
were resolved by the first author. Offense types commonly reported included betrayals of trust (39%), verbal aggression (29%),
social rejection (28%), lying (15%), gossip (15%), selfishness
(12%), and infidelity (12%).2 There were no systematic differ-

ences in personal capability or unforgiveness scores on the basis of
offense type.

Controlling for Other Robust Predictors of Forgiveness
As predicted, there was a negative correlation between personal
capability and unforgiveness (TRIM scores; see Table 1). Our first
aim was to see whether this association would remain significant
when controlling for apology and relationship closeness, two robust predictors of forgiveness that have been identified in prior
research. As shown in Table 1, personal capability correlated
positively with apology and did not correlate with relationship
closeness. Consistent with prior studies, unforgiveness showed
negative correlations with both apology and preoffense relationship closeness. TRIM scores did not differ by gender (see Table 1),
nor was there a significant interaction of capability and gender
(␤ ⫽ ⫺.05, ns).
Our hypothesis was that the capability variable would account
for unique variance in TRIM scores even when we controlled for
apology and relationship closeness—two robust predictors of forgiveness that when considered together, accounted for 32% of the
variance in TRIM scores. Crucially, capability did continue to
explain unique variance in TRIM scores when we controlled for
apology, pr(213) ⫽ ⫺.32, p ⬍ .01; closeness, pr(213) ⫽ ⫺.41,
p ⬍ .01; and both apology and closeness together, pr(212) ⫽
⫺.34, p ⬍ .01. In short, the predictive role of personal capability
could not be reduced to its link with either of these robust predictors of forgiveness.

Controlling for Dispositional Factors
Next, we tested the hypothesis that personal capability would
still predict lower TRIM scores when dispositional predictors of
forgiveness were controlled. As described above, these analyses
used the subsample of participants (n ⫽ 136) who completed the
personality study. As shown in Table 1, unforgiveness was associated with lower dispositional forgiveness, lower Agreeableness,
marginally lower self-esteem, and lower social desirability. Personal capability was linked with lower Extraversion and marginally lower narcissism and social desirability. Contrary to predictions, personal capability was not linked with any of the other Big
Five factors, religiosity, or dispositional forgiveness.
Our next step was to examine the partial correlation between
personal capability and TRIM scores while controlling for the
significant dispositional predictors of TRIMs. Note that social
desirability was the only plausible confound, because it correlated
with both personal capability and TRIMs. To err on the conservative side, however, we controlled for all dispositional predictors of
TRIMs: dispositional forgiveness, Agreeableness, self-esteem, and
social desirability. The capability variable still predicted a large
amount of variance in TRIMs, pr(129) ⫽ ⫺.52, p ⬍ .01. (When
we controlled for each dispositional predictor individually, partial
correlations between personal capability and TRIMs ranged from
⫺.48 to ⫺.52, ps ⬍ .01.)
2
These offense types are similar to those observed in other studies of
undergraduates. Because of space constraints, this is the only study for
which we will describe offense types.

NOT SO INNOCENT

Situational Mediators
As described in the introduction, we proposed three mediators of
the link between personal capability and forgiveness: offense
severity, perceived similarity to the offender, and empathic understanding. We started by testing each variable as an individual
mediator using the method popularized by Baron and Kenny
(1986). Baron and Kenny’s procedure involves three regression
analyses: (a) Does the supposed predictor (or independent variable) X actually predict the criterion (or dependent variable) Y? (b)
Does X also predict the supposed mediator M? (c) When X and M
are both included in a regression equation predicting Y, does M
continue to predict Y while X’s contribution drops substantially? If
all three criteria are met, and assuming that the proposed model
makes conceptual sense, then the results can be said to support the
hypothesis of mediation.
Table 2 summarizes the hierarchical regressions used to test for
mediation. The data met the first criterion, as shown in Model 1:
Personal capability predicted lower TRIM (unforgiveness) scores.
Criterion two also found support, as shown in Table 1: Personal
capability was linked with lower severity ratings, higher perceived
similarity to the offender, and higher empathic understanding. To
test the third criterion, we ran three separate hierarchical regressions, as shown in Models 2A–2C in Table 2. In each model, the
hypothesized mediator explained unique variance. The magnitude
of the personal capability coefficients decreased in each case,
although not to 0, suggesting partial mediation. (The coefficient
for personal capability did drop to nonsignificance in model 2A,
but not to 0.)
To provide a significance test for the question of mediation, we
added a final column in Table 2 providing a z score. The z score
came from the product of coefficients strategy, sometimes called
the Sobel test (e.g., Sobel, 1982; see Preacher & Hayes, 2007, for
a recent review). The strategy compares the indirect effects of X on
Y (through M) with the standard error of these indirect effects. The

501

resulting z score allows significance tests that evaluate whether the
supposed mediator can truly be called a mediator—that is, whether
it statistically accounts for a significant part of X’s prediction of Y.
As shown in the final column of Table 2, all three hypothesized
mediators met criteria for mediation using the Sobel test.
We had proposed what Preacher and Hayes (2007) described as
a multiple mediation model. Our prediction was that severity,
empathic understanding, and perceived similarity to the offender
would each serve as distinct mediators of the link between personal capability and unforgiveness. In order to test for unique
effects, we needed to consider all three mediators simultaneously.
The three mediators did correlate highly with each other: severity
and similarity, r(214) ⫽ ⫺.39; severity and empathic understanding, r(215) ⫽ ⫺.39; and similarity and empathic understanding,
r(215) ⫽ .47, all ps ⬍ .01. Thus, it was conceivable that one or
more of the mediation links would disappear when all three mediators were considered simultaneously.
Part of the mediation question could be addressed through
hierarchical regression. In Model 3 of Table 2, we added the three
mediators to the equation. As predicted, all three continued to
predict unique variance in unforgiveness when considered simultaneously, and the role of personal capability was no longer significant. Although these results were consistent with multiple
mediation, we needed to see significance tests of mediation to
draw firm conclusions. To address the question of multiple mediation, we turned to an SPSS macro developed by Preacher and
Hayes (2004). First, the macro used the product of coefficients
strategy to compute a total indirect effect: Did the three proposed
mediators, considered as a group, mediate the personal capability–
unforgiveness link? The answer was yes, as indicated by the highly
significant z score in the last column of Table 2. The macro then
evaluated each of the proposed mediators, and each one yielded a
significant z score (see Table 2). Taken together, these data provided strong evidence for the proposed multiple mediation pattern

Table 2
Hierarchical Regressions Predicting Unforgiveness (TRIM Scores) via Three Proposed Mediators: Severity, Similarity to Offender,
and Empathic Understanding
Predictor
Model 1
Personal capability
Model 2A
Personal capability
Perceived similarity to offender
Model 2B
Personal capability
Empathic understanding
Model 2C
Personal capability
Offense severity
Model 3
Personal capability
Perceived similarity to offender
Empathic understanding
Offense severity
a

␤
⫺.40**
⫺.11
⫺.52**
⫺.21**
⫺.42**
⫺.20**
.48**

R2

Rchange2a

.16**

z of test for
mediationb

40.18** (1, 214)

.35**

.19**

57.07** (2, 212)

.30**

.14**

45.07** (2, 213)

.36**

.19**

58.97** (2, 212)

**

**

6.14**
4.95**

.51

.34

.06
⫺.36**
⫺.23**
.37**

For each model, Rchange2 represents change from Model 1.
z scores are based on use of the product of coefficients strategy (Preacher & Hayes, 2007).
**
p ⬍ .01.
b

F (dfmodel, dferr)

**

54.78

(4, 209)

5.23**
8.38**
5.12**
3.52**
4.82**

502

EXLINE, BAUMEISTER, ZELL, KRAFT, AND WITVLIET

involving three distinct mediators: empathic understanding, perceived similarity to the offender, and offense severity.3

A More Behavioral Measure: What Would Participants
Like To Say to Their Offenders?
Because of the potential for bias in self-report scales, we also
examined whether the link between personal capability and forgiveness would emerge using another forgiveness measure, one
closer to actual behavior. As described in the Method section, we
coded participants’ open-ended reports of what they would like to
say to the other person (assuming that they could speak openly
with no fear of the other person’s response). The more personal
capability people expressed, the less hostility they expressed in
these statements, and the more positive emotion they expressed.
(See Table 1 for correlations.)
As with the TRIM, we wanted to see whether personal capability would predict unique variance in the behavioral forgiveness
measures when other robust predictors of forgiveness were controlled. When we controlled for prerelationship closeness, personal
capability continued to predict less expressed hostility, pr(189) ⫽
⫺.29, p ⬍ .01, and more positive emotion, pr(189) ⫽ .20, p ⬍ .01.
When we controlled for apology, personal capability still predicted
less hostility, pr(188) ⫽ ⫺.21, p ⬍ .01, and marginally more
positive emotion, pr(189) ⫽ .13, p ⬍ .10. When we controlled for
all dispositional variables that predicted either positive emotion or
hostility (Neuroticism, Extraversion, dispositional forgiveness,
and religiosity; see Table 1), personal capability continued to
predict more expressed positive emotion, pr(116) ⫽ .22, p ⬍ .05,
and less expressed hostility, pr(116) ⫽ ⫺.28, p ⬍ .01. (When we
controlled for each disposition individually, partial correlations
ranged from ⫺.29 to ⫺.32, ps ⬍ .01, for hostility and from .17 to
.23, ps ⬍.07, for positive emotion.)
Finally, we examined whether perceived similarity, empathic
understanding, and severity would mediate the links between personal capability and expressed positive and negative emotion (as
they did with TRIMs). For brevity, we report only the z scores
relevant to mediation. When we assessed each proposed mediator
individually, the hypothesis of mediation was supported for all
three proposed mediators when predicting both positive emotion
and hostility, with zs ranging from 2.41 ( p ⬍ .05) to 4.58 ( p ⬍
.01). When we considered all three mediators simultaneously in a
model predicting positive emotion, perceived similarity met criteria for mediation (z ⫽ 3.57, p ⬍ .01). The mediational role of
empathic understanding was marginal (z ⫽ 1.82, p ⬍ .10), whereas
severity did not meet criteria for mediation (z ⫽ 1.36, ns). In the
case of negative emotion, all three proposed mediators met criteria
for mediation when considered simultaneously (similarity, z ⫽
2.60, p ⬍ .01; empathic understanding, z ⫽ 2.38, p ⬍ .05; severity,
z ⫽ 2.21, p ⬍ .05.)
In summary, all three proposed mediators (similarity, empathic
understanding, and severity) did meet criteria for mediation when
considered individually. These associations held for both expressed hostility and positive emotion. Multiple mediation analyses revealed that when considered together, all three variables were
distinct mediators of the link between personal capability and
expressed hostility, just as they were in the case of TRIM scores.
In the case of expressed positive emotion, perceived similarity to
the offender emerged as a clear mediator, with empathic under-

standing playing a marginal role and offense severity not being
significant.

Summary
As in Study 1, results from Study 2 suggested that people will
be more forgiving toward others if they see themselves as capable
of a similar wrongdoing. Note that this link was shown not only
with a standard self-report measure (the TRIM) but also with
written statements of what people would like to say to their
offenders. Personal capability continued to predict forgiveness
even when we controlled for other robust predictors such as
apology, relationship closeness, offense harmfulness, and several
major dispositional factors.
Multiple mediation analyses suggest that the link between capability and forgiveness can be explained through at least three
proximal factors: First, seeing oneself capable of committing a
certain offense may imply that the offense is not seen as very
serious in moral terms. Second, seeing oneself as capable of
committing a similar misdeed is associated with feeling similar to
the offender. Third, personal capability is also linked with seeing
the offense as more understandable. All three of these factors, in
turn, predict greater forgiveness.

Study 3: From Personal Offenses to Intergroup
Atrocities—Responses to the September 11 Attacks
Studies 1 and 2 demonstrated that in terms of everyday offenses,
seeing oneself as capable of committing a similar offense is
associated with greater forgiveness. Yet, there may be an upper
limit to this association. What about cases involving heinous
offenses such as the murder of innocent people? Could most
people see themselves as capable of committing such an act? The
attacks of September 11, 2001, provided an opportunity to examine people’s responses to an extremely severe offense. Furthermore, this offense was one that was experienced at the group level,
in contrast to the individual offenses in Studies 1 and 2. We
reasoned that in the case of the events of 9/11, people’s
forgiveness-related judgments might reflect group-level thinking
more than individual-level thinking. Specifically, we predicted that
people would feel more forgiving toward the perpetrators of the
9/11 attacks to the extent that they saw the United States government (rather than the individual self) as capable of a similar
offense.

Method
Participants and Procedure
Participants were 186 undergraduates (91 men, 95 women)
enrolled in introductory psychology courses at a private university
3

The Preacher and Hayes (2004) macro performed contrasts between
the three mediation paths but revealed no differences in magnitude, with zs
ranging from 0.98 to 1.95, ns. The macro also provided an additional set of
bootstrapping tests. Bootstrapping techniques have been recommended in
mediation research because they allow sampling distributions of indirect
effects to be estimated empirically (Preacher & Hayes, 2007). The bootstrapping results, based on 1,000 resamples, offered further confirmation of
mediation: The 95% confidence intervals produced by bootstrapping did
not include 0 for any of the indirect effects, meaning that it was very likely
that all three mediation effects were significant.

NOT SO INNOCENT

in the Midwestern United States. All data were collected during the
week of October 8, 2001, which was the first week of U.S. strikes
against Afghanistan after the September 11 attacks. Participants
received partial course credit. The sample was mostly Caucasian
(77%) and Asian (12%). Because we wanted to ensure that all
participants saw the United States as an ingroup, we deleted 8
participants who were not United States citizens. (All significant
results reported below remained significant when these 8 participants were included.)

503

thing as bad as what these individuals did?”; and “Do you think it’s
possible that the United States government could ever do something as bad as what these individuals did?” (M ⫽ 6.8, SD ⫽ 2.3,
␣ ⫽ .80). Participants then answered the same four questions with
reference to themselves rather than the government (i.e., “Do you
think that you could ever . . .”; M ⫽ 1.3, SD ⫽ 2.0, ␣ ⫽ .82).

Results and Discussion
Descriptive Statistics

Measures
All measures were scored by averaging across items. Measures
are described in the order in which they appeared in the questionnaire.
Desired actions toward individual perpetrators and nations
harboring them. Participants were asked, “To what extent would
you currently support each of these actions by the United States,
assuming they are logistically feasible?” Responses were rated
from ⫺5 (would strongly oppose) to 5 (would strongly support).
Maximum likelihood factor analysis with varimax rotation suggested creation of three factors: The first was labeled Attack (M ⫽
0.0, SD ⫽ 2.4, ␣ ⫽ .77, eigenvalue ⫽ 4.0, 33% of variance). This
factor included four items: on-the-spot killing of perpetrators without trial, death penalty (after trial and conviction), military strikes
against civilian targets, and military strikes against military targets.
The second factor was labeled No Action (M ⫽ ⫺4.1, SD ⫽ 1.4,
␣ ⫽ .63, eigenvalue ⫽ 1.3, 11% of variance) and included two
items: no action against individual perpetrators and no action
against nations harboring them. The third factor, Negotiation (M ⫽
⫺0.8, SD ⫽ 2.5, ␣ ⫽ .61, eigenvalue ⫽ 1.1, 9% of variance),
included two items: negotiation with individual perpetrators and
negotiation with nations harboring them. We also retained a single
item on giving economic aid (M ⫽ 1.2, SD ⫽ 2.8).
Vengeful and benevolent motivations. Participants completed
a measure of situation-specific forgiveness based on the Vengefulness and Benevolence subscales of the TRIM-18-R (McCullough & Hoyt, 2002). Items were rated from 1 (strongly disagree)
to 5 (strongly agree). For the first subscale, Vengefulness (M ⫽
3.6, SD ⫽ 1.0, ␣ ⫽ .89), items included “I want them to suffer,”
“I want revenge,” “I wish that something bad would happen to
them,” “I hate them,” “I feel cold toward them,” “I feel bitter
toward them,” and “I want to see them hurt and miserable.” For the
second subscale, Benevolence (M ⫽ 1.6, SD ⫽ 0.7, ␣ ⫽ .90),
items included “I have good will toward them,” “I want to help
them,” “I feel compassionate toward them,” “I wish that something
good would happen to them,” “I want to see them happy and
content,” “I feel warm toward them,” and “I care about them.”
Capability for similar actions by the United States government
and by self. Participants responded to four items on a scale from
0 (no, definitely not) to 10 (yes, definitely). They were informed
that in all items, “these individuals” referred to those directly
involved in planning and carrying out the incidents at the World
Trade Center and Pentagon. Items were as follows: “Do you think
that the United States government has ever done something as bad
as what these individuals did?”; “Given the right circumstances,
could the United States government be capable of doing something
as bad as what these individuals did?”; “Can you imagine a
situation in which the United States government could do some-

Our study was conducted in the Midwestern United States, an
area somewhat removed from the areas directly affected by the
attacks (New York City, Washington, DC, and the part of Pennsylvania where the fourth plane crashed). Nonetheless, 5% of
participants knew someone who had died as a result of the attacks,
and 4% knew people that were considered missing. Although only
14% of students had lived in the regions directly affected by the
attacks, 98% reported that they had friends or family living in
those areas. The majority (86%) had visited one of the three
regions directly affected by the attacks. Twenty-three percent had
visited the World Trade Center, and 24% had visited the Pentagon.
These results suggest a moderate level of psychological closeness
to the event. Participants were clearly angry, reporting attitudes
that were more vengeful (M ⫽ 3.6, SD ⫽ 2.0) than benevolent
(M ⫽ 1.6, SD ⫽ 0.7), t(177) ⫽ 17.92, p ⬍ .01, ␩2 ⫽ .64.

Creation of Forgiveness Index
To simplify our analyses, we conducted a maximum likelihood
factor analysis with varimax rotation on the six forgiveness-related
measures: benevolence, vengefulness, and desires for attack, no
action, negotiation, and aid. The six variables loaded on a common
factor (with vengefulness and desires for attack reverse scored).
They were standardized and combined to form a single forgiveness
index (M ⫽ 0.0, SD ⫽ 0.7, ␣ ⫽ .77).

Seeing One’s Government (Rather Than Oneself) as
Capable of Heinous Offenses
Participants saw the U.S. government as being much more
capable of a similar offense (M ⫽ 6.8, SD ⫽ 2.3) than they
themselves were (M ⫽ 1.3, SD ⫽ 2.0), t(177) ⫽ 27.23, p ⬍ .01,
␩2 ⫽ .81. As predicted, seeing one’s government as capable of a
similar offense was strongly associated with more forgiving motivations, r(178) ⫽ .43, p ⬍ .01. However, seeing oneself as
capable of a similar offense did not predict forgiveness, r(178) ⫽
.07, ns. (Although we omit individual correlations here to save
space, note that correlations with all six forgiveness-related measures were significant in the government case. None were significant in the personal case.) In the event of a heinous offense against
one’s ingroup, then, it may be more relevant for people to consider
their group’s capability for a similar offense rather than their own
personal capability.
One question that might be raised about these data is whether we
were inadvertently tapping people’s degree of support for military
action. Could the variables in our forgiveness index reflect political loyalties or attitudes about war rather than private emotions
about the offense? We ran supplemental analyses to address these
potential problems. Specifically, we controlled for participants’

EXLINE, BAUMEISTER, ZELL, KRAFT, AND WITVLIET

504

degree of support for strikes against military targets—a variable
likely to reflect general attitudes about war and the decisions of
government officials. Yet, even when general support for military
action was controlled, seeing the U.S. government as capable of a
similar offense still predicted more forgiving attitudes on all of the
other variables: less vengeful attitudes, pr(175) ⫽ ⫺.27, p ⬍ .01;
more benevolent attitudes, pr(175) ⫽ .19, p ⬍ .05; less desire to
see perpetrators killed on the spot, pr(175) ⫽ ⫺.21, p ⬍ .01; less
support for the death penalty for perpetrators, pr(175) ⫽ ⫺.18, p ⬍
.05; more desire to avoid taking action, pr(175) ⫽ .18, p ⬍ .05;
more support of negotiation, pr(175) ⫽ .19, p ⫽ .01; more support
for economic aid, pr(175) ⫽ .17, p ⬍ .05; and less support for
strikes against civilian targets, pr(175) ⫽ ⫺.23, p ⬍ .01.

judgments of another’s offense. We chose to start with a standardized, hypothetical offense in which participants were not personally victimized, and we did so for two reasons. First, a scenario
design provided considerable experimental control through use of
a standardized situation. Second, we wanted to see whether reflecting on personal offenses could affect the “cold” cognitive
judgments that people make as outside observers—that is, when
they read or hear about other people’s offenses but do not suffer
harm themselves. In line with several recent studies (Cohen,
Malka, Rozin, & Cherfas, 2006; Farrow & Woodruff, 2005; Wohl
& Branscombe, 2005), we asked participants to rate the extent to
which they saw the offense as forgivable.4

Method

Summary
Study 3 extended the concepts from Studies 1 and 2 to the level
of intergroup offenses. Undergraduates were asked to reflect on the
9/11 attacks, a situation that tested the limits of empathy. People
had great difficulty seeing themselves as capable of committing an
act as heinous as this one, and their personal sense of capability did
not predict forgiving attitudes. As predicted, however, participants
reported more forgiving attitudes to the extent that they saw their
own government as capable of a similar offense. These associations remained significant after we controlled for participants’
level of support for military action.

Studies 4 –7: Experimental Designs—Does Reflecting on
One’s Own Offenses Promote Forgiving Attitudes?
Studies 1–3 confirmed the link between personal capability and
forgiveness in both interpersonal and intergroup contexts. Our next
aim was to shift to an experimental approach: Is it possible to
facilitate forgiving attitudes by prompting people to consider their
own misdeeds?
Our strategy was to ask people to focus on similar offenses of
their own. We chose this technique for two reasons. First, there
was an empirical precedent for this procedure in several apology–
forgiveness studies (Takaku, 2001; Takaku et al., 2001). Second,
pilot studies suggested that reflection on past offenses was more
potent and engaging than techniques such as imagining hypothetical future offenses, listing reasons why one might commit a
similar offense, or recalling situations involving temptation but no
misdeed. Our primary aim was to evaluate whether recalling a
similar offense would facilitate forgiving attitudes. We began with
scenario methods (Studies 4 and 5) before turning to real-life
offenses (Study 6).
As described in the introduction, we also considered two potential moderator variables in these experiments. In Studies 5 and 6,
we considered whether it would be important to recall a truly
similar offense of one’s own. In all four experiments (4 –7), we
examined the role of gender. Our prediction was that in terms of
facilitating forgiveness (or reducing vengefulness), the similar
offense technique would be more effective for men than for
women.

Study 4: Responses to a Standardized, Hypothetical
Offense
The aim of Study 4 was to see whether asking people to recall
a similar offense of their own would make them less harsh in their

Participants
Participants (65 men, 52 women, and 1 participant who did not
list gender)5 were enrolled in an introductory psychology course at
a private research university in Ohio. Ethnicities were predominantly Caucasian (81%) and Asian/Pacific Islander (12%). The
mean age was 18.7 years (SD ⫽ 1.1).

Procedure
Participants read a scenario about a hypothetical offense by a
fellow college student. We chose an offense that was likely to be
common in college life. Participants were asked to imagine both
people in the scenario as being of their own gender. The scenario
read as follows:
Lee & Chris are roommates at [the same university as participants].
One night they are talking, getting to know each other better, and Lee
confides in Chris about some very painful and embarrassing childhood memories. Suddenly feeling ashamed and afraid of the word
getting out, Lee swears Chris to secrecy. Chris agrees, reassuring Lee
that the secret is safe. A few weeks later, Chris is talking with some
other friends. The conversation eventually turns to gossip about fellow
students. One friend makes a joking reference to something that Lee
did, and the gossip starts to center on Lee. A few of the friends turn
to Chris and say, “Well, you’re Lee’s roommate. What dirt have you
picked up?” Chris then blurts out Lee’s secret, and everyone laughs.
Word eventually gets back to Lee that Chris revealed this sensitive
information.

Participants were randomly assigned to one of two conditions.
Participants in the morally similar condition read these instructions: “Please recall a social situation in which you revealed some
negative, private information about someone else. Note: This
should NOT be a situation in which you revealed the information
in order to protect or help the other person.” They were then asked
to briefly describe the recalled situation before answering questions about the offense. In the control condition, participants
4

Pilot studies have clarified that labeling an offense as forgivable does
not imply that it is seen as trivial. Rather, the construct of forgivability
seems to capture beliefs about whether it would be morally appropriate to
forgive the offense, regardless of its severity.
5
Studies 4 –7 were not originally designed to focus on gender differences. As such, most of them have unbalanced cell sizes containing more
men than women, reflecting the gender composition of the university.

NOT SO INNOCENT

simply read the scenario and answered questions about the offense.
(Although the Study 4 control condition was straightforward, it did
not involve the same level of cognitive processing or elapsed time
as the similar offense condition.6 We remedied this potential
problem in Study 6.) Participants rated how forgivable Chris’s
offense was on an 11-point scale (0 ⫽ not at all, 10 ⫽ extremely).

Results and Discussion
Results appear in Table 3. Although the main effect of experimental condition was not significant, an interaction with gender
emerged clearly. In the control condition, men and women did not
differ in their forgivability ratings. In the similar offense condition,
men’s forgivability ratings were higher than those of women. Men
rated the offense as more forgivable in the experimental condition
than in the control condition, suggesting that the prompt to consider their own misdeeds made them less harsh toward the hypothetical offender. Women gave equivalent forgivability ratings in
both conditions.
These results supported the hypothesis that reflecting on one’s
own offenses can indeed soften judgments of hypothetical offenses, but only for men. Men, but not women, gave higher
forgivability ratings if they were primed to consider a similar
offense of their own.

Study 5: Multiple Scenarios
Study 5 built on the scenario methods of Study 4, with a primary
prediction being that the Study 4 gender interaction would replicate across a wider set of situations. Study 5 also included new
items that enabled closer inspection of underlying processes. Participants in the similar offense condition were asked to directly
compare their offense with the target offense in terms of severity
and type. They also reflected on whether writing about their own
offense seemed to affect the forgivability, understandability, and
size of the target offense. By tracing participant reports of what
they had experienced, we could evaluate whether the underlying
psychological processes fit with the mediational findings from
Study 2. Participants also answered questions about the emotions
that they experienced while reflecting on their own offenses. On
the basis of prior research suggesting that negative emotion inhibits generosity (e.g., Exline & Fisher, 2005), we predicted that
negative feelings about one’s own offense (e.g., shame, guilt,
embarrassment) would be linked with lower forgivability judgments.

Pilot Study
Before conducting Study 5, we did a pilot study. We asked 87
undergraduates to rate the forgivability of five hypothetical offenses: a slightly revised version of the Study 4 gossip offense
(described below) plus four offenses from the Transgression Narrative Test of Forgivingness (TNTF; Berry, Worthington, Parrott,
O’Connor, & Wade, 2001). Scenarios were presented in random
order. The pilot study strongly supported the correlational prediction that was the focus of Studies 1–3: A sense of personal
capability was linked with higher forgivability ratings, r(87) ⫽ .42,
p ⬍ .01. On the basis of the results of the pilot study, we selected
three scenarios to use for Study 5: All were seen as being non-

505

trivial offenses with significant negative consequences, but they
were not so severe that participants could not relate to them.

Method
Participants
Participants (94 men, 110 women, and 1 participant who did not
indicate gender) were enrolled in an introductory psychology
course at a private research university in Ohio. Ethnicities were
predominantly European American or Caucasian (75%) and Asian/
Pacific Islander (17%). The mean age was 19.1 years (SD ⫽ 0.8).

Procedure and Measures
Participants were randomly assigned to read one of three scenarios chosen from the pilot study. One was the Study 4 gossip
scenario, modified so that the offender was not sworn to secrecy.
The other two scenarios were from the TNTF (Berry et al., 2001).
The second scenario, involving carelessness by a babysitter, led to
the serious consequence of a child drinking cleaning fluid. The
third scenario involved failing to drop off an urgent, job-related
letter for a friend at the post office. Participants were asked to
imagine both characters as being of their own gender.
Each participant was randomly assigned to read one of the three
scenarios just described. As in Study 4, participants were randomly
assigned to one of two conditions: a similar offense condition or a
control condition in which they gave forgivability ratings immediately after reading the scenario. Many of our hypotheses were
specific to the similar offense condition. To ensure adequate power
to test these hypotheses, we deliberately assigned more participants to the similar offense condition (n ⫽ 160) than the control
condition (n ⫽ 45).
Forgivability. We used the measure from Study 4 (M ⫽ 5.0,
SD ⫽ 2.5), which appeared immediately after the experimental
manipulation.
Personal capability. The measure from Study 2 was used
(M ⫽ 6.0, SD ⫽ 2.5, ␣ ⫽ .87).
Manipulation checks. On a scale from 0 (not at all) to 10
(extremely), participants rated the harmfulness (M ⫽ 6.8, SD ⫽
2.5) and intentionality (M ⫽ 2.9, SD ⫽ 2.9) of the target offense.
Similarity of offenses. Similar offense condition participants
rated the similarity of their offense to the target (in terms of
offense type) on a scale from 0 (not at all) to 10 (extremely; M ⫽
5.4, SD ⫽ 2.8). They also rated the severity of their offense
relative to the target from ⫺2 (much less severe) to 2 (much more
severe; M ⫽ ⫺1.2, SD ⫽ 1.0). (Stated differently, most participants [n ⫽ 128; 81%] recalled offenses that they rated less severe
than the target offense. This is consistent with the idea of selfserving bias.)
Emotions associated with recalling an offense. Participants in
the similar offense condition read the prompt, “When I was recalling and writing about my own offense, I felt . . .” followed by
6
In pilot tests we did include other conditions that were similar to the
similar offense condition in terms of elapsed time and processing requirements (e.g., writing lists, describing hypothetical offenses). In terms of
forgivability ratings, these conditions did not differ from a control condition in which people gave immediate judgments.

EXLINE, BAUMEISTER, ZELL, KRAFT, AND WITVLIET

506

Table 3
Differences in Forgiveness by Experiment, Condition, and Gender for Studies 4 –7
F(␩2)
Dependent variable

Men

Women

t(␩2)

Model

Gender

Condition

Interaction

3.58⫹(.03)

1.41(.01)

7.80**(.06)

0.99(.00)

4.88*(.02)

4.50*(.02)

4.65**(.13)

10.91**(.10)

1.38(.01)

4.81*(.05)

2.96*(.08)

5.06*(.05)

0.41(.00)

5.79*(.06)

2.28⫹(.04)

0.18(.00)

2.34(.02)

3.72⫹(.02)

3.88**(.07)

5.14*(.03)

0.52(.00)

9.40**(.06)

Study 4: Gossip scenario
Forgivability
Control
M
SD
n
Similar offense
M
SD
n
t(␩2)

4.71**(.11)
0.58(.01)
4.1
2.2
30

4.4
2.2
27

5.6
2.0
35
**
2.86 (.12)

3.8
1.6
25
1.14(.03)

3.66**(.19)

Study 5: Multiple scenarios
Forgivability
Control
M
SD
n
Similar offense
M
SD
n
t(␩2)

1.74⫹(.07)
3.5
2.1
14

4.9
2.6
31

5.4
2.5
79
**
2.68 (.07)

4.9
2.4
78
0.08(.00)

2.54⫹(.04)

1.27(.01)

Study 6: Real-life offenses
TRIM
Control
M
SD
n
Similar offense
M
SD
n
t(␩2)
Vengefulness
Control
M
SD
n
Similar offense
M
SD
n
t(␩2)

4.00*(.36)
2.9
0.5
17.0

2.0
0.7
13

2.3
0.8
46
2.71*(.11)

2.2
0.8
25
0.63(.01)

0.94(.01)

2.57*(.19)
2.0
0.8
17

1.4
0.6
13

1.6
0.6
46
2.46*(.09)

1.6
0.7
25
1.09(.03)

0.14(.00)

Study 7: A more subtle priming manipulation
TRIM
Control
M
SD
n
Capability-empathy questions
M
SD
N
t(␩2)
Vengefulness
Control
M
SD
N

1.61(.06)
3.0
0.8
25

2.6
0.7
20

2.5
0.9
58
2.64*(.08)

2.7
1.0
52
0.26(.00)

1.33(.02)

3.11**(.18)
2.6
1.1
25

1.6
0.8
20

NOT SO INNOCENT

507

Table 3 (continued)
F(␩2)
Dependent variable
Capability-empathy questions
M
SD
n
t(␩2)

Men

Women

1.9
0.8
58
2.92**(.10)

2.0
1.0
52
1.52(.03)

t(␩2)

Model

Gender

Condition

Interaction

0.75(.00)

Note. TRIM ⫽ Transgression Related Interpersonal Motivations Inventory.
p ⬍ .10. * p ⬍ .05. ** p ⬍ .01.

⫹

12 adjectives rated from 0 (not at all) to 10 (extremely). Maximum
likelihood factor analysis with varimax rotation suggested creation
of two factors, one for negative emotion (humbled, ashamed, sad,
upset, embarrassed, guilty; M ⫽ 4.4, SD ⫽ 2.5, ␣s ranging from
.89 to .92 across scenarios) and one for positive emotion (happy,
positive feelings, peaceful, good; M ⫽ 2.0, SD ⫽ 2.0, ␣s ranging
from .80 to .88).
Subjective changes in perception. Similar offense condition
participants rated whether having to write about their own offense
made the target offense seem less versus more forgivable (⫺2 ⫽
much less, 2 ⫽ much more; M ⫽ 0.1, SD ⫽ 0.8), harder versus
easier to understand (⫺2 ⫽ much harder, 2 ⫽ much easier; M ⫽
0.5, SD ⫽ 0.7), and smaller versus larger (⫺2 ⫽ much smaller,
2 ⫽ much larger; M ⫽ 0.3, SD ⫽ 0.9).

Results
Collapsing Across Scenario Type
One reason for using multiple scenarios was to see whether the
Study 4 results would replicate across a broader range of offense
types. Manipulation checks confirmed that participants did distinguish between the offenses in meaningful ways.7 We were not
interested in making fine-grained comparisons between the scenarios as part of Study 4; this had already been done in the pilot
study. There were no differences in the baseline forgivability
ratings of the three scenarios (gossip, M ⫽ 5.3, SD ⫽ 2.4; babysitter, M ⫽ 4.9, SD ⫽ 2.5; post office, M ⫽ 4.8, SD ⫽ 2.5),
omnibus F(2, 201) ⫽ 0.79, ns, ␩2 ⫽ .01. Scenario type did not
interact with priming condition to predict forgivability, F(2,
198) ⫽ 0.67, ns, ␩2 ⫽ .01, nor was there a significant interaction
between gender and scenario type, F(2, 196) ⫽ 0.36, ns, ␩2 ⫽ .00.
On the basis of these null findings, we collapsed across scenario
type and do not discuss this variable further.

Replication of Gender Interaction
Our first aim was to determine whether the gender interaction
from Study 4 would replicate in Study 5. As shown in Table 3,
results revealed a main effect of priming condition as well as the
predicted interaction between priming condition and gender. In the
control condition, women gave marginally higher forgivability
ratings than did men. As in Study 4, recalling a similar offense did
not affect women’s forgivability ratings. But once again, men gave
gentler judgments when asked to recall a similar offense. We
return to the gender differences later in the section.

Underlying Mechanisms in the Similar Offense Condition:
A Path Analysis
The remaining analyses focused on the similar offense condition
only—in particular, the items in which participants reflected on the
process of describing their offenses. Setting aside the gender
interaction for the moment, we focused on another question: Under
what conditions would recalling a similar offense of one’s own
make a target offense seem more forgivable? We made the following predictions, which are summarized in the Figure 1 path
diagram.8
Study 2 revealed that the link between personal capability and
forgiveness was partly mediated by empathic understanding and
offense severity. In Study 5, we asked participants directly about
whether writing about their own offenses led to changes in understanding and offense size (a proxy for severity). If recalling one’s
own offense is indeed linked with increased understanding and a
sense that the target offense seems smaller, we reasoned that both
shifts in perception would predict reports that the target offense
seemed more forgivable.
In order to set these empathic and offense-shrinking processes in
motion, a person might need to recall an offense that is truly
similar to the target. We predicted that two domains of similarity
would be important: First, to the extent that people recall an
offense that is similar in type (e.g., gossip; betrayal), they should
report that reflecting on their offense made the target offense seem
more understandable. Second, to the extent that people recall an
offense that is similar in severity, they should report that focusing
on their own offense made the target offense seem to shrink. As
reported earlier (see the Method section), most people recalled
offenses that were less severe than the target. Recalling a lesser
7

Specifically, the scenario in which the babysitter’s error allowed the
child to drink cleaning fluid was seen as more harmful (M ⫽ 7.9, SD ⫽ 2.4)
than the gossip scenario (M ⫽ 6.1, SD ⫽ 2.4) or the post office scenario
(M ⫽ 6.6, SD ⫽ 2.3), omnibus F(2, 300) ⫽ 10.24, p ⬍ .01, ␩2 ⫽ .09 (for
contrasts, p ⬍ .01, with Bonferroni correction). The gossip offense was
seen as more intentional (M ⫽ 5.0, SD ⫽ 2.9) than the post office offense
(M ⫽ 2.9, SD ⫽ 2.4), which in turn was seen as more intentional than the
babysitter offense (M ⫽ 0.7, SD ⫽ 1.3), omnibus F(2, 201) ⫽ 60.09, p ⬍
.01, ␩2 ⫽ .37 (both comparisons significant at p ⬍ .01 with Bonferroni
correction).
8
In Studies 5 and 6, the chain of proposed connections was more
complex than in Study 2. This is why we used path analysis rather than the
multiple mediation procedures outlined in Study 2.

EXLINE, BAUMEISTER, ZELL, KRAFT, AND WITVLIET

508
Similarity of own
offense to target

.15+

.32**

Personal
capability

.40**

Target offense
became easier
to understand

.26**

Comparative
severity of own
offense

.34**

Target offense
seemed more
forgivable

Target offense
seemed to grow
−.43** (vs. shrink)

−.36**

Figure 1. Study 5: Mechanisms linking personal capability and forgivability shifts in similar offense condition. ␹2(8, N ⫽ 160) ⫽ 7.83, p ⫽ .45;
␹2/df ⫽ 0.98, normed fit index ⫽ .99, comparative fit index ⫽ 1.0,
root-mean-square error of approximation ⫽ .00. ⫹p ⬍ .10; **p ⬍ .01.

offense of one’s own could lead to contrast effects, making the
target offense seem to grow rather than shrink. We expected
certain people to be more likely to recall offenses that were truly
similar in severity and type: people who reported high levels of
personal capability for committing a similar offense.
The proposed pattern of associations met with strong support, as
shown in the path diagram in Figure 1. We used AMOS (Version
4; Arbuckle, 1999). Although we tested several alternate models,
we show only the best-fitting model for simplicity: ␹2(8, N ⫽
160) ⫽ 7.83, p ⫽ .45; ␹2/df ⫽ 0.98, normed fit index (NFI) ⫽ .99,
comparative fit index (CFI) ⫽ 1.0, root-mean-square error of
approximation (RMSEA) ⫽ .00. As predicted, personal capability
predicted greater odds of recalling offenses that were similar to the
target in terms of both severity and type. Similarity in type predicted marginally ( p ⬍ .07) greater understanding (see note below), whereas similar severity predicted a perception that the target
offense had shrunk. Both increased understanding and decreased
offense size predicted a sense that the target offense seemed more
forgivable. These associations were generally consistent with the
hypotheses.
To optimize model fit, we included one path in the model that
was not originally proposed: a direct link between personal capability and increased understanding. Without this path, several
indices suggested a mediocre fit: ␹2(9, N ⫽ 160) ⫽ 17.76, p ⫽ .04;
␹2/df ⫽ 1.97, NFI ⫽ .98, CFI ⫽ .99, RMSEA ⫽ .08. However, it
is worth noting that when this nonhypothesized path was deleted,
the link between similar type and increased understanding was
highly significant (␤ ⫽ .25, p ⬍ .01) rather than marginal (␤ ⫽
.15, p ⬍ .07).

Gender and Perceived Shifts in Offense Size
Women were more likely than men to report a contrast effect in
which the target offense seemed to grow in size (women, M ⫽ 0.4,
SD ⫽ 0.9; men, M ⫽ 0.1, SD ⫽ 0.9), t(154) ⫽ 2.17, p ⬍ .05, ␩2 ⫽
.03. There were no gender differences on any of the other variables
shown in Figure 1.

The Role of Negative Emotion
As predicted, the more negative emotion that participants associated with the memory of their misdeed, the lower their forgiv-

ability ratings of the target offense, r(158) ⫽ ⫺.17, p ⬍ .05. There
was no interaction between negative emotion and gender (␤ ⫽
⫺.08, ns). However, women did report marginally more negative
emotion about their offenses (M ⫽ 4.8, SD ⫽ 2.5) than men (M ⫽
4.1, SD ⫽ 2.4), t(156) ⫽ 1.74, p ⬍ .10, ␩2 ⫽ .02. Negative
emotion was not associated with any of the other variables shown
in Figure 1 (rs ranged from .00 to .14, ps ⬎ .05).

Summary
Study 5 showed that when people recalled their own offenses, it
was important that they chose offenses that were similar in severity
and type to the target offense. Recalling an offense that was similar
in type was linked with reports of increased understanding,
whereas recalling an offense that was similar in severity was
linked with reports that the target offense seemed to shrink. People
high in personal capability were more likely to recall offenses that
were truly similar to the target in terms of severity and type.
Complementing the results of Study 3, these findings suggest that
there may be an upper limit on the use of the similar-offense
technique for many people. If people do not recall similar offenses
of their own (and many people in this study did not), the resulting
contrast effects could make the target offense seem even larger.
Study 5 replicated the gender differences of Study 4. For men,
drawing attention to their own offenses led to higher forgivability
ratings of a target offense. Reflecting on an offense of one’s own
did not affect forgivability ratings for women. Women were more
likely than men to report that focusing on their own offense made
the target offense seem to grow in size. Also, when asked how it
felt to focus on their own offenses, women reported marginally
more self-focused negative emotion than men. Negative emotion,
in turn, predicted harsher judgments.

Study 6: A Return to Real-Life Offenses
Study 6 was designed to see whether the main findings of Study
5 (gender interaction; path model in Figure 1) would replicate in
cases involving actual offenses. In several important respects,
Study 6 presented a much tougher test of our hypotheses than the
scenario studies: First, use of real-life situations would provide a
broad range of offense types, features, and consequences, all of
which would increase extraneous variance. Second, because the
offenses occurred in the past, people might have already decided
whether they wanted to forgive. Third, whereas the scenario studies had focused on “cold,” cognitively based judgments about
forgivability, the next set of studies emphasized “hot,” emotionally
charged motivations related to forgiveness and vengefulness. Furthermore, the offenses examined in Studies 6 and 7 were ones in
which people were personally engaged. All of these factors would
make it harder for a brief manipulation to influence forgiveness
ratings, thus providing a challenging testing ground for our hypotheses.
A secondary aim was to build on Study 2, in which we examined
whether various dispositional factors might explain the association
between forgiveness and personal capability. Although Study 2
addressed many dispositional variables, two potentially important
ones were omitted: empathy and humility. Because humility focuses on acceptance of personal limitations (Exline, Campbell, et
al., 2004), it could be linked with personal capability. The humble

NOT SO INNOCENT

person’s ability to transcend self-interest might also predict greater
forgiveness. Envisioning oneself performing wrongful actions
might also involve empathic processing, and there is evidence that
dispositional empathy predicts greater forgiveness (e.g., Brown,
2003; Konstam et al., 2001; Macaskill et al., 2002; Toussaint &
Webb, 2005). In Study 6, then, we examined whether dispositional
humility or empathy might subsume the capability–forgiveness
link.

509

They also rated whether describing their own offenses made the
other’s offense seem less versus more forgivable (⫺2 ⫽ much less,
2 ⫽ much more; M ⫽ 0.3, SD ⫽ 0.9), smaller versus larger (⫺2 ⫽
much smaller, 2 ⫽ much larger; M ⫽ 0.0, SD ⫽ 0.9), and harder
versus easier to understand (⫺2 ⫽ much harder, 2 much easier;
M ⫽ 0.2, SD ⫽ 0.8).

Results
Gender Interaction

Method
Participants
Participants (63 men, 38 women) were enrolled in an introductory psychology course at a private research university in Ohio.
The sample was predominantly Caucasian (70%) and Asian/
Pacific Islander (25%). The mean age was 19.9 years (SD ⫽ 3.2).

Procedure
After being seated in the laboratory, participants gave informed
consent and completed a measure of individual differences. The
second questionnaire prompted them to recall a time in which they
had been deeply offended, harmed, or hurt by another person and
still had some anger or resentment about the experience. After
describing the offense, participants were randomly assigned to
either a similar offense condition or a control condition. In the
similar offense condition, participants were asked to spend the next
10 min writing about a time in which they seriously hurt or
offended someone else. They were asked to focus, if possible, on
an offense that was similar to the one committed against them. If
they could not think of anything similar, they were asked to
describe another situation in which they seriously hurt or offended
another person. In the control condition, participants were asked to
spend the next 10 min writing about what a typical week was like
for them 1 year before they participated in the study. They were
asked to remember details such as their class schedule, where they
lived, when they typically worked and socialized, and so on. After
writing their essays, participants completed the TRIM (unforgiveness) scale along with some additional questions about the offense.

Measures
We assessed humility using a 56-item measure under development by Hill and colleagues (Hill, Welton, & Seybold, 2003).
Items were rated from 1 (I do not at all identify with this item) to
5 (I fully identify with this item; M ⫽ 3.5, SD ⫽ 0.3, ␣ ⫽ .78). We
assessed empathy using two subscales of Davis’s (1983) measure,
which rated items from 1 (does not describe me well) to 5 (describes me very well). The two subscales were Empathic Concern
(M ⫽ 2.8, SD ⫽ 0.6, ␣ ⫽ .78) and Perspective Taking (M ⫽ 2.5,
SD ⫽ 07, ␣ ⫽ .80). The measures from Study 2 were used to
assess perceived similarity to the offender (M ⫽ ⫺2.2, SD ⫽ 2.9),
and personal capability (M ⫽ 4.3, SD ⫽ 3.0, ␣ ⫽ .88). We again
used the TRIM-18-R (McCullough & Hoyt, 2002; whole TRIM,
M ⫽ 2.3, SD ⫽ 0.8, ␣ ⫽ .75; Vengefulness, M ⫽ 1.7, SD ⫽ 0.7,
␣ ⫽ .82; Avoidance, M ⫽ 2.7, SD ⫽ 1.2, ␣ ⫽ .91; Benevolence,
M ⫽ 3.4, SD ⫽ 0.9, ␣ ⫽ .88). As in Study 5, similar-offense
participants rated the similarity of their offenses to the target in
severity (M ⫽ ⫺0.8, SD ⫽ 1.1) and type (M ⫽ 5.4, SD ⫽ 2.8).

Replicating Studies 4 and 5, results revealed a significant interaction between gender and condition, this time using unforgiveness (TRIM) as the dependent variable. (See Table 3.) In the
control condition, men reported much higher TRIMs than women.
But men who recalled a similar offense showed substantially lower
TRIMs than men in the control condition. In fact, their TRIM
scores were indistinguishable from those of the women.
We also examined the TRIM subscales to see whether similar
gender– condition interactions would emerge for each one. Vengefulness was the only subscale to show a significant interaction, and
we report those results in Table 3. For Avoidance, F(1, 97) ⫽ 2.40,
ns, ␩2 ⫽ .02, and for Benevolence, F(1, 97) ⫽ 2.76, p ⫽ .10, ␩2 ⫽
.03. It seems that for men, the dramatic effects of reflecting on a
similar offense were largely due to reduced vengefulness.

Mechanisms Within the Similar-Offense Condition
As in Study 5, we used a path diagram (see Figure 2) to examine
links between personal capability, forgiveness, and participant
reflections on the process of recalling their own offenses. To assess
forgiveness, we included not only shifts in perceived forgivability
(Study 5) but also TRIM scores. In addition to the other mediators
from Study 5, we were also able to add the third major mediator
identified in Study 2: perceived similarity to the offender. Figure 2
shows the model: ␹2(18, N ⫽ 71) ⫽ 22.34, p ⫽ .22; ␹2/df ⫽ 1.24,
NFI ⫽ .97, CFI ⫽ .99, RMSEA ⫽ .05.
The top part of Figure 2 focuses on the prediction of unforgiveness (TRIM scores). Personal capability was linked with a greater
sense of similarity to the offender, which in turn predicted increased understanding (marginal) and lower TRIMs. Increased
understanding also directly predicted lower TRIMs. Contrary to
hypotheses, however, shifts in perceived offense size were unrelated to TRIMs. (When the model did include a path from offense
size to TRIM, the coefficient was ⫺.04, ns.)
The bottom part of Figure 2 examines people’s reflections about
whether recalling their own offenses made the other’s offense
seem more forgivable. Results largely replicated those from Study
5. The higher that people scored on personal capability, the more
likely they were to recall offenses seen as similar in type and
severity to the other’s offense. Similarity in type predicted increased understanding, whereas similar severity predicted a sense
that the other person’s offense had shrunk (or at least not grown).
Seeing the other’s offense as both smaller and more understandable, in turn, predicted a greater sense of forgivability ( p ⬍ .05;
because these analyses were designed to replicate Study 5, we used
one-tailed probabilities).

Gender and Perceived Shifts in Offense Size
As in Study 5, women were more likely than men to report a
contrast effect in which the target offense seemed to grow in size

EXLINE, BAUMEISTER, ZELL, KRAFT, AND WITVLIET

510

Perceived
similarity to
offender

−.34**
Unforgiveness
(TRIM)

.42**
.19

.30**

Similarity of own
offense to target

.36**

−.32**

+

Target offense
became easier
to understand

.22*

Personal
capability
.38**

Comparative
severity of own
offense

−.38**

Target offense
seemed to grow
(vs. shrink)

Target offense
seemed more
forgivable
−.21*

Figure 2. Study 6: Mechanisms linking personal capability, unforgiveness, and forgivability shifts in similar
offense condition. ␹2(18, N ⫽ 71) ⫽ 22.34, p ⫽ .22; ␹2/df ⫽ 1.24, normed fit index ⫽ .97, comparative fit
index ⫽ .99, root-mean-square error of approximation ⫽ .05. ⫹p ⬍ .10; *p ⬍ .05; **p ⬍ .01. TRIM ⫽
Transgression Related Interpersonal Motivations Inventory.

(women, M ⫽ 0.4, SD ⫽ 1.0; men, M ⫽ ⫺0.2, SD ⫽ 0.8), t(69) ⫽
1.64, p ⬍ .05, ␩2 ⫽ .09. There were no other gender differences on
any of the other mediators reported in Figure 2.

Does Dispositional Humility or Empathy Account for the
Capability–Forgiveness Link?
The final aim was to examine two dispositional variables that
were not addressed in Study 2: humility and empathy. As predicted, humility correlated negatively with TRIMs, r(101) ⫽ ⫺.27,
p ⬍ .01, and positively with personal capability, r(101) ⫽ .21, p ⬍
.05. In a regression with capability and humility as predictors, both
variables explained unique variance in TRIMs (capability, ␤ ⫽
⫺.22, p ⬍ .05; humility, ␤ ⫽ ⫺.22, p ⬍ .05; R2 ⫽ .12, p ⬍ .01).
Empathic perspective taking was not associated with TRIMs,
r(101) ⫽ ⫺.11, ns, or with capability, r(101) ⫽ ⫺.08, ns. Empathic concern correlated negatively with TRIMs, r(101) ⫽ ⫺.27,
p ⬍ .01, but it was not linked with capability, r(101) ⫽ .01, ns. In
a regression with capability and empathic concern as predictors,
both variables explained unique variance (for capability, ␤ ⫽
⫺.22, p ⬍ .01; for empathic concern, ␤ ⫽ ⫺.25, p ⬍ .01; R2 ⫽
.14, p ⬍ .01).9 In summary, although humility and empathic
concern did predict forgiveness, neither subsumed the role of
personal capability.

Summary
By using experimental methods with real-life offenses, Study 6
provided a rigorous test of our hypotheses. Study 6 replicated the
key gender interaction from Studies 4 and 5, using both the full
TRIM and its Vengefulness subscale. In the control condition, men
showed much more vengeful, unforgiving attitudes than women.
However, men who recalled a similar offense showed substantially
less vengefulness and grudge holding, dropping to levels similar to
those of women. Women’s TRIM and Vengefulness scores were
not affected by the manipulation.
As shown in Figure 2, all three mediators of the capability–
forgiveness link that were identified in Study 2 emerged once
again as important mechanisms. To the extent that people saw

themselves capable of committing similar offenses, they recalled
offenses that were truly similar in severity and type. Recalling
truly similar offenses, in turn, was linked with the increased
understanding and offense shrinking that predicted higher forgivability ratings. Personal capability was also linked with a greater
sense of similarity to the offender. This sense of similarity, combined with increased understanding, predicted lower TRIM scores.
Finally, Study 6 ruled out two potential dispositional confounds
that Study 2 did not address: empathy and humility. The link
between personal capability and forgiveness was not subsumed by
the roles of dispositional humility or empathic concern, although
personal capability was positively associated with a humble disposition.

Study 7: Could a Subtle Empathy–Capability
Manipulation Reduce Men’s Vengefulness?
Study 7 built on the gender interaction findings from Studies
4 – 6. The personal capability manipulations from those studies
represented overt, conscious primes. In Study 7, we examined
whether a more subtle manipulation could be effective. Rather than
going through the conscious step of writing about one’s own
offense or envisioning the other person’s perspective, could it be
useful to simply answer questions involving personal capability
and empathic understanding? We predicted that it would.
We saw an opportunity to test this hypothesis in an existing data
set. As in Study 6, this study used real-life offenses, but it also
included counterbalancing of questionnaires. The study included
questions about personal capability and empathic understanding.
The survey was structured so that some participants answered the
capability and empathy questions just before they completed the
vengefulness measure, whereas others did not answer them until
after the vengefulness measure. Our purpose in Study 7 was to see
whether simply being asked to reflect on these questions would be
enough to reduce vengefulness scores—at least for men.
9

In both regressions, all key associations remained significant when
condition, gender, and their interaction term were added to the equation.

NOT SO INNOCENT

Method
Participants
Participants (83 men, 72 women) were taking an introductory
psychology course at a private research university in Ohio. They
completed a survey for course credit. Ethnicities were primarily
Caucasian (79%) and Asian/Pacific Islander (16%). The mean age
was 18.9 (SD ⫽ 1.3).

Procedure
As in Studies 2 and 6, participants recalled an offense that was
committed against them. On the basis of counterbalancing procedures,10 some participants completed the capability– empathy
questions before the vengefulness questions, whereas others completed them afterward.

Measures
Unforgiveness. We again used the TRIM-18-R (McCullough
& Hoyt, 2002; whole TRIM, M ⫽ 2.7, SD ⫽ 0.9, ␣ ⫽ .85;
Vengefulness, M ⫽ 2.0, SD ⫽ 1.0, ␣ ⫽ .90; Avoidance, M ⫽ 3.0,
SD ⫽ 1.1; ␣ ⫽ .92; Benevolence, M ⫽ 3.0, SD ⫽ 1.0, ␣ ⫽ .91).
Personal capability and empathy. The page assessing personal
capability and empathy (which was used as the experimental
manipulation here) contained three measures, the first two of
which were counterbalanced. The four items from Study 2 assessed personal capability for committing an offense similar in
severity (M ⫽ 4.7, SD ⫽ 3.1, ␣ ⫽ .95). Another set of personal
capability questions was modified to emphasize similarity in offense type rather than severity (e.g., “Given the right circumstances, could you be capable of doing something similar in type
to what the other person did?”; M ⫽ 4.6, SD ⫽ 3.1, ␣ ⫽ .94). The
two sets of capability questions were highly correlated, r(155) ⫽
.66, p ⬍ .01, and were thus combined into a single measure (M ⫽
4.7, SD ⫽ 2.8). After the personal capability questions, the page
included the four empathic understanding items from Study 2
(M ⫽ 3.8, SD ⫽ 2.6, ␣ ⫽ .89).

Results
As in the prior studies, we conducted a two-way analysis of
variance with gender and experimental condition (in this case,
placement of the capability– empathy items) as predictors of unforgiveness. As Table 3 shows, results revealed a marginally
significant interaction predicting TRIMs. As in Study 6, however,
the interaction was significant for vengefulness. The pattern was
now familiar: When not primed with capability– empathy items,
men reported more vengefulness than women. But when
capability– empathy items preceded the TRIM, men’s Vengefulness scores were significantly reduced, becoming equal to those of
women. (As in Study 6, interactions predicting benevolence and
avoidance were not significant, ps ⬎.24, ␩2 ⫽ .01.)
There were no gender differences in personal capability,
t(153) ⫽ 0.44, ns, or empathic understanding, t(153) ⫽ 0.47, ns (in
both cases, ␩2 ⫽ .00). When the capability– empathy items preceded the TRIM, vengefulness correlated negatively with personal
capability, r(110) ⫽ ⫺.20, p ⬍ .05, and empathic understanding,
r(110) ⫽ ⫺.41, p ⬍ .01. When vengefulness came first, venge-

511

fulness also correlated negatively with personal capability, r(45) ⫽
⫺.36, p ⬍ .01, and empathic understanding, r(45) ⫽ ⫺.44,
p ⬍ .01.

Summary
This was the fourth study in the series to demonstrate a gender
difference in how people respond to reflecting on their own potential for similar offenses. Unlike the similar offense manipulation from Studies 4 – 6, the one used here was much more
subtle—a mere reordering of questionnaires. For men, vengefulness was reduced simply by answering questions about their capability for similar wrongdoing and their ability to see the situation
from the other person’s perspective.

General Discussion
Seven studies tested the hypothesis that reflecting on one’s own
capability for similar offenses would predict more forgiving attitudes toward others. Three correlational studies (1–3) showed
consistent support for the hypothesis, ruled out several alternative
explanations, and identified three mediating processes. Four experimental studies (4 –7) offered additional confirmation of the
proposed mediators and also identified some important boundary
conditions related to offense similarity and gender.

Forgiveness and Personal Capability:
Correlational Studies
Our correlational studies revealed a clear, consistent association:
Forgiveness was greater to the extent that people could see themselves as capable of a similar wrongdoing. Personal capability
distinguished between forgiven and unforgiven offenses (Study 1),
predicted unforgiveness of actual transgressions (Study 2), and
predicted greater forgivability ratings of hypothetical offenses
(pilot study before Study 4). The association between personal
capability and forgiveness was robust across procedures and samples. First, the association extended beyond college students
(Study 1). Second, the link remained strong when we controlled
for other robust predictors of forgiveness: relationship closeness
and apology (Study 2). Third, the association was found not only
on self-report rating scales but also on a more behavioral measure:
people’s written statements of what they would like to say to the
other person (Study 2). Last, the association could not be reduced
to individual-difference factors such as the Big Five, narcissism,
entitlement, religiosity, or social desirability. Humility and empathy were also ruled out as dispositional confounds (Study 6).
At least three pathways mediate the link between personal
capability and forgiveness (Studies 2, 5, and 6). First, people can
more easily see themselves committing minor offenses compared
with major ones, and minor offenses are easier to forgive. In fact,
another’s offense may seem to shrink in size when evaluators
recall truly similar offenses of their own (Studies 5 and 6). The
logic seems to be, “If I could do it, then it can’t be that serious.”
10

Because of multiple types of counterbalancing and various hypotheses
in the original study, there were unequal cell sizes in the data set. The
condition with capability– empathy measures first had 110 participants, and
the condition with the TRIM first had 45 participants.

EXLINE, BAUMEISTER, ZELL, KRAFT, AND WITVLIET

512

The other two mediators focus on empathic connection: If people
see themselves as capable of a similar wrongdoing, this belief is
linked with greater empathic understanding and a sense of being
similar to the offender. Both of these perceptions, in turn, predict
greater forgiveness.
The association between personal capability and forgiveness
also applies at an intergroup level, as shown in Study 3’s assessment of responses to the September 11 attacks. When faced with
a heinous offense against one’s ingroup, seeing oneself as capable
of a similar offense did not predict forgiveness. There may have
been a floor effect here, because most people simply could not
envision themselves doing something so horrible. However, seeing
members of one’s ingroup (in this case, the U.S. government) as
capable of a similar wrongdoing predicted more forgiving attitudes. Notably, this sense of ingroup capability predicted not only
forgiving attitudes but also less support for specific aggressive
actions, including strikes against civilian targets, the death penalty
for perpetrators, and perpetrators being shot on sight. It is important to note that these associations remained when we controlled
for support for strikes against military targets, which could be seen
as a proxy for general military attitudes, attitudes toward the
current administration, or support of the decision to go to war.

Reflecting on One’s Own Capability for Offenses:
Experimental Studies
Having established a correlational link between personal capability and forgiveness, we turned to experimental designs. Most of
these studies (4 – 6) focused on having people recall a similar
offense of their own. Results suggested that having people recall a
similar offense may indeed facilitate forgiveness; however, offense
similarity and gender are important moderators.

Offense Similarity
In order to influence forgivability judgments, it was important
that participants regarded their own offenses as similar in both
severity and type to the target offense (Studies 5 and 6). In terms
of making offenses easier to understand, it was especially important to recall an offense that was similar in type. But in terms of
making offenses seem smaller, it was important to recall an offense
of one’s own that was just as severe as the target offense. It was
common for people to recall offenses that were less severe than
that of the target, consistent with the notion of self-enhancement
(e.g., Sedikides & Strube, 1997).
These results, combined with those of the September 11 study
(Study 3), suggest a practical upper limit on the use of the similar
offense technique: If people cannot recall an offense that is similar
in type, the comparison may fail to facilitate understanding because it will seem irrelevant. And if people cannot recall an offense
that is similar in severity, the other person’s offense may seem to
grow in size. In cases of heinous or unusual offenses, it may be
useful to focus on the personal capability of ingroup members
(Study 3), perhaps extending one’s ingroup to include all of
humanity (Wohl & Branscombe, 2005).

Gender Effects
Across our experimental studies, one consistent finding was that
men gave gentler judgments (Studies 4 and 5) and showed less

vengefulness (Studies 6 and 7) after reflecting on their own actual
or potential misdeeds. Study 7 revealed that even a very subtle
manipulation was effective: Men reported less vengefulness if they
were first asked to answer questions about personal capability and
empathic understanding. The experimental manipulations used in
our studies did not influence forgiveness-related responses among
women, who tended to be less vengeful than men in the control
conditions (Studies 6 and 7).
In terms of facilitating forgiveness, why might personal capability prompts be especially effective for men? One possibility
might be a basic gender difference in motivational orientation.
Baron-Cohen (2002) and others have argued that male brains are
oriented toward systems—that is, they strive to analyze rules that
govern behavior (or other systems, such as mechanical ones), with
an ultimate goal of prediction or control. Female brains, in contrast, are proposed to assign higher priority to empathic concern for
individuals. If so, then the primary male concern in response to
another’s offense would involve justice, whereas females would be
more concerned with relationship repair.
In support of this reasoning, a recent study by Singer et al.
(2006) using brain imaging techniques suggested that women and
men responded differently to the punishment of a transgressor.
Participants witnessed the punishment of a person who had played
selfishly in a group resource game. Men showed activity in the
reward centers of their brains, suggesting that they found pleasure
or satisfaction in the punishment of the transgressor, whereas
female brains showed activation in emotional and empathic sections, indicating concern for the individual’s suffering. To the
extent that a personal capability prime would shift men out of a
predominant “systems mode,” instead facilitating relational or
empathic thinking, it could lead to sharp decreases in punitive
behavior. Among women, personal capability primes might have
little or no effect because they do not represent much of a shift
from the predominant relational mode.
A complementary explanation centers on the distinction between agency and communion, with agency usually seen as masculine and communion as feminine (Bakan, 1966; Spence & Helmreich, 1978). The assumption of gender differences along those
lines may be especially relevant when the choice is between
seeking revenge and forgiving. Forgiveness would support a communal concern with maintaining social bonds, whereas agency
would be linked to revenge seeking, which is a highly active form
of unforgiveness. Our findings complement prior work showing
that males favor revenge more strongly than females do (e.g.,
Stuckless & Goranson, 1992), which may reflect their concerns
with justice and agency, respectively. Among males, then, reflecting on one’s own offenses (or capability) might weaken vengeful
motives by fostering a more reflective, communal stance. Women’s low levels of vengefulness may have led to a floor effect.
Another possible explanation received indirect support in Study 5:
Focusing on one’s own offenses opens the door for self-focused
negative thoughts and emotions, which tend to inhibit prosocial responses (Exline & Fisher, 2005). Women did report marginally more
negative emotion than men regarding their offenses. Self-focused
rumination has been linked with shame and personal distress (Joireman, 2004), and women tend to ruminate on negative thoughts more
than men (Nolen-Hoeksema, Larson, & Grayson, 1999). Women
were also more likely than men to report that focusing on their own
offense made the target offense seem to grow in size (Studies 5 and

NOT SO INNOCENT

6). If the goal is to facilitate forgiving attitudes, then, it may be
counterproductive to break women’s predominant relational stance by
encouraging them to focus on their flaws.
It is noteworthy that gender differences emerged only in the
experimental studies—those in which some people were primed to
focus on personal capability. The correlational link between personal capability and forgiveness was not moderated by gender
(Study 2). Both men and women were more forgiving to the extent
that they saw themselves as capable of similar offenses. These
findings contrast with prior work on empathy, which suggested
that the magnitude of empathy–forgiveness correlations might
differ for men and women (Fincham et al., 2002; Toussaint &
Webb, 2005). However, those studies focused on emotional empathy (Fincham et al., 2002) and dispositional empathy (Toussaint
& Webb, 2005), variables with only indirect relevance to the
situation-specific, cognitive factor of personal capability.

Predictors of Personal Capability
Given the role of personal capability in predicting forgiveness,
it seems important to pinpoint variables that predict personal
capability. As shown in Study 2, personal capability correlated
positively with the extent of apologies received. In terms of dispositional predictors, personal capability was linked with introversion as well as marginally lower narcissism and social desirability.
Perhaps surprisingly, personal capability did not correlate with any
of the other Big Five factors, religiosity, or dispositional forgiveness. Study 6 demonstrated that humility predicted personal capability but that dispositional empathy did not.

Forgiveness Versus Minimization of Offenses:
Ethical Implications
Our studies have considered personal capability and empathy as
potential facilitators of forgiveness. Before we conclude, it seems
important to clarify that we are not suggesting any type of value
judgment about whether forgiveness is morally appropriate. To use an
extreme example, one murderer might reflect on the actions of another
murderer and think, “Oh, murder isn’t so serious. After all, I’ve done
it.” Such minimization of the offense could indeed facilitate a forgiving attitude. But it could also serve as justification for one’s own
future crimes, and it could work against justice by leading people to
condone serious offenses. In the case of everyday offenses, a softening of one’s attitude toward an offender may bring a sense of peace
and help to heal damaged relationships. But in an abusive or exploitative situation, a premature softening of attitudes might contribute to
a decision to stay in a dangerous situation.
When dealing with these sorts of examples, forgiveness theorists
are quick to point out that true forgiveness is not the same thing as
condoning, minimizing, or excusing offenses (e.g., Enright & Fitzgibbons, 2000). We definitely agree. But, as some have pointed out
(Belicki, Rourke, & McCarthy, 2007), the empathic thinking that
often accompanies forgiveness can also lead people in the direction of
minimizing offenses. Our own data also support the potential for
minimizing: Reflecting on a similar offense of one’s own often did
promote softer judgments of the other party’s offense. Clearly, there
are situations in which demands for justice and safety might not be
served if people are too quick to shrink the offenses of others. Our aim
here was to consider whether reflecting on one’s own dark side can

513

facilitate more forgiving attitudes—regardless of whether such attitudes are seen as an asset or a liability.

Limitations and Future Directions
Although we have tried to be thorough, the work presented here
has some clear limitations. Most of our data were based on student
samples (except Study 1) and self-report instruments. Study 2
revealed that the findings did extend to a quasi-behavioral measure—a statement of what participants would like to say to the
other person. Future studies will ideally include more behavioral
measures.
Our research revealed some evidence that the link between
capability and forgiveness may apply at an intergroup level.
Clearly, however, our work has only scratched the surface in terms
of intergroup processes. In future work, it will be important to
consider ways of facilitating empathy in cases of severe intergroup
offenses— cases in which people may find it difficult to empathize.
Looking at one’s own ingroup may be one useful technique, as
Study 3 suggested. But there are likely to be many cases in which
people cannot envision their ingroup members committing certain
offenses. One good alternative may be to create a highly inclusive
ingroup, such as humanity (Wohl & Branscombe, 2005). By focusing on their connections with others, people may experience not
only more prosocial attitudes but also a greater sense of humility.
When we started this research, our conceptualization of humility
was based on the idea that people need to come to terms with their
dark sides—their personal limitations, offenses, and failings. Yet,
our data suggest that asking people to focus on their transgressions
may be risky if it fosters negative emotion or defensiveness. These
risks may be especially salient for women, given their tendencies
toward negative rumination (Nolen-Hoeksema et al., 1999). In
fact, recent theorizing suggests that the open, nondefensive stance
associated with humility may require a secure, stable basis of
self-worth along with a positive emotional tone (Exline, Campbell,
et al., 2004). If people lack these foundations, directing them to
focus on their limitations might merely stimulate shame, which
tends to prompt defensive reactions (e.g., Tangney & Dearing,
2002). Future forgiveness work should examine techniques to help
people face their limitations in constructive ways. In addition to
humility, topics such as self-affirmation (Steele, 1999) and selfcompassion (Neff, 2003) seem highly relevant to this effort.

Conclusion
This research suggests that when people evaluate the offenses of
others, their attitudes are more forgiving when they see themselves
as capable of committing similar offenses. A sense of personal
capability can make another’s offense seem less severe, and it is
also linked with empathic understanding and a sense of similarity
to the offender. As shown in Studies 4 – 6, asking people to recall
similar offenses of their own may facilitate forgiveness— but
primarily for men. Across all four experimental studies, men
became more forgiving when prompted to reflect on their personal
capability for similar offenses. Women did not show this effect. In
fact, there was some evidence that for women, focusing on their
own offenses prompted negative emotion and actually made the
other person’s offense seem to grow in size. To deepen our
understanding of humility and forgiveness, future studies might

EXLINE, BAUMEISTER, ZELL, KRAFT, AND WITVLIET

514

incorporate positive features such as security, connectedness, and
positive emotion. People may need to have these resources available before they can face their limitations and offenses in constructive ways.

References
Arbuckle, J. L. (1999). AMOS 4.0 [Computer software]. Chicago: Smallwaters.
Bakan, D. (1966). The duality of human existence: An essay on psychology
and religion. Chicago: Rand McNally.
Baron, R. M., & Kenny, D. A. (1986). The moderator–mediator variable
distinction in social psychological research: Conceptual, strategic, and
statistical considerations. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
51, 1173–1182.
Baron-Cohen, S. (2002). The extreme male brain theory of autism. Trends
in Cognitive Sciences, 6, 248 –254.
Baumeister, R. F. (1988). Should we stop studying sex differences altogether? American Psychologist, 43, 1092–1095.
Baumeister, R. F. (1997). Evil: Inside human violence and cruelty. New
York: W. H. Freeman.
Baumeister, R. F., Stillwell, A., & Wotman, S. R. (1990). Victim and
perpetrator accounts of interpersonal conflict: Autobiographical narratives about anger. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 59,
994 –1005.
Belicki, K., Rourke, J., & McCarthy, M. (2007). Potential dangers of
empathy and related conundrums. In W. Malcolm, N. De Courville, &
K. Belicki (Eds.), Women’s reflections on the complexities of forgiveness
(pp. 165–185). New York: Routledge.
Berry, J. W., Worthington, E. L., Jr., O’Connor, L. E., Parrott, L., & Wade,
N. G. (2005). Forgivingness, vengeful rumination, and affective traits.
Journal of Personality, 73, 183–225.
Berry, J. W., Worthington, E. L., Jr., Parrott, L., III, O’Connor, L. E., &
Wade, N. G. (2001). Dispositional forgivingness: Development and
construct validity of the Transgression Narrative Test of Forgivingness
(TNTF). Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 27, 1277–1290.
Boon, S. D., & Sulsky, L. M. (1997). Attributions of blame and forgiveness
in romantic relationships: A policy-capturing study. Journal of Social
Behavior and Personality, 12, 19 – 44.
Brown, R. P. (2003). Measuring individual differences in the tendency to
forgive: Construct validity and links with depression. Personality and
Social Psychology Bulletin, 29, 759 –771.
Brown, R. P. (2004). Vengeance is mine: Narcissism, vengeance, and the
tendency to forgive. Journal of Research in Personality, 38, 576 –584.
Campbell, W. K., Bonacci, A. M., Shelton, J., Exline, J. J., & Bushman,
B. J. (2004). Psychological entitlement: Interpersonal consequences and
validation of a new self-report measure. Journal of Personality Assessment, 83, 29 – 45.
Cohen, A. B., Malka, A., Rozin, P., & Cherfas, L. (2006). Religion and
unforgivable offenses. Journal of Personality, 74, 85–117.
Darby, B. W., & Schlenker, B. R. (1982). Children’s reactions to apologies.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 43, 742–753.
Darley, J. M., & Pittman, T. S. (2003). The psychology of compensatory
and retributive justice. Personality and Social Psychology Review, 7,
324 –336.
Davis, M. H. (1983). Measuring individual differences in empathy: Evidence for a multidimensional approach. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 44, 113–126.
Ellard, J. H., Miller, C. D., Baumle, T., & Olson, J. M. (2002). Just world
processes in demonizing. In M. Ross & D. T. Miller (Eds.), The justice
motive in everyday life (pp. 350 –362). Cambridge, England: Cambridge
University Press.
Enright, R. D., & Fitzgibbons, R. P. (2000). Helping clients forgive: An
empirical guide for resolving anger and restoring hope. Washington,
DC: American Psychological Association.

Exline, J. J., & Baumeister, R. F. (2000). Expressing forgiveness and
repentance: Benefits and barriers. In M. E. McCullough, K. Pargament,
& C. Thoresen (Eds.), Forgiveness: Theory, research, and practice (pp.
133–155). New York: Guilford.
Exline, J. J., Baumeister, R. F., Bushman, B. J., Campbell, W. K., & Finkel,
E. J. (2004). Too proud to let go: Narcissistic entitlement as a barrier to
forgiveness. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 87, 894 –912.
Exline, J. J., Campbell, W. K., Baumeister, R. F., Joiner, T., Krueger, J., &
Kachorek, L. V. (2004). Humility and modesty. In C. Peterson & M.
Seligman (Eds.), Character strengths and virtues: A handbook and
classification (pp. 461– 475). New York: Oxford.
Exline, J. J., & Fisher, M. L. (2005, January). Sentimental journeys and
balanced accounts: Emotion, social exchange, and decisions to “pass
on” acts of kindness. Poster presented at the annual meeting of the
Society for Personality and Social Psychology, New Orleans, LA.
Exline, J. J., Yali, A. M., & Sanderson, W. C. (2000). Guilt, discord, and
alienation: The role of religious strain in depression and suicidality.
Journal of Clinical Psychology, 56, 1481–1496.
Exline, J. J., & Youngstrom, E. A. (2004). [Emotions, personality, and
attitudes among undergraduates.] Unpublished raw data.
Exline, J. J., & Zell, A. L. (2007). Does a humble attitude promote
forgiveness? Challenges, caveats, and the role of gender. In W. Malcolm, N. De Courville, & K. Belicki (Eds.), Women’s reflections on the
complexities of forgiveness (pp. 235–251). New York: Routledge.
Farrow, T. F. D., & Woodruff, P. W. R. (2005). Neuroimaging of forgivability. In E. L. Worthington, Jr. (Ed.), Handbook of forgiveness (pp.
259 –272). New York: Routledge.
Fincham, F. D., Paleari, F. G., & Regalia, C. (2002). Forgiveness in
marriage: The role of relationship quality, attributions, and empathy.
Personal Relationships, 9, 27–37.
Finkel, E. J., Rusbult, C. E., Kumashiro, M., & Hannon, P. (2002). Dealing
with betrayal in close relationships: Does commitment promote forgiveness? Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 82, 956 –974.
Gibbons, F. X., & Gerrard, M. (1991). Downward comparison and coping
with threat. In J. Suls & T. A. Wills (Eds.), Social comparison: Contemporary theory and research (pp. 317–346). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Goffman, E. (1955). On face-work: An analysis of ritual elements in social
interaction. Psychiatry, 18, 213–231.
Haidt, J. (2001). The emotional dog and its rational tail: A social intuitionist approach to moral judgment. Psychological Review, 108, 814 – 834.
Hill, P. C., Welton, G. I., & Seybold, K. S. (2003). [Preliminary data on a
16-item humility scale]. Unpublished raw data.
John, O. P., Donahue, E. M., & Kentle, R. L. (1991). The “Big Five”
Inventory—Version 4a & 54 [Technical report]. Berkeley, CA: Institute
of Personality Assessment and Research.
Joireman, J. (2004). Empathy and self-absorption paradox II: Selfrumination and self-reflection as mediators between shame, guilt and
empathy. Self & Identity, 3, 225–238.
Karremans, J. C., Van Lange, P. A. M., Ouwerkerk, J. W., & Kluwer, E. S.
(2003). When forgiving enhances psychological well-being: The role of
interpersonal commitment. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 84, 1011–1026.
Konstam, V., Chernoff, M., & Deveney, S. (2001). Toward forgiveness:
The role of shame, guilt, anger, and empathy. Counseling and Values,
46, 26 –39.
Lawler, K. A., Younger, J. W., Piferi, R. L., Billington, E., Jobe, R.,
Edmonson, K., et al. (2003). A change of heart: Cardiovascular correlates of forgiveness in response to interpersonal conflict. Journal of
Behavioral Medicine, 26, 373–393.
Macaskill, A., Maltby, J., & Day, L. (2002). Forgiveness of self and others
and emotional empathy. Journal of Social Psychology, 142, 663– 665.
Malcolm, W., Warwar, S., & Greenberg, L. (2005). Facilitating forgiveness
in individual therapy as an approach to resolving interpersonal injuries.

NOT SO INNOCENT
In E. L. Worthington, Jr. (Ed.), Handbook of forgiveness (pp. 379 –391).
New York: Routledge.
McCullough, M. E., & Hoyt, W. T. (2002). Transgression-related motivational
dispositions: Personality substrates of forgiveness and their links to the Big
Five. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 28, 1556 –1573.
McCullough, M. E., Rachal, K. C., Sandage, S. J., Worthington, E. L., Jr.,
Brown, S. W., & Hight, T. L. (1998). Interpersonal forgiving in close
relationships II: Theoretical elaboration and measurement. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 75, 1586 –1603.
McCullough, M. E., Worthington, E. L., Jr., & Rachal, K. C. (1997).
Interpersonal forgiving in close relationships. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 73, 321–336.
Miller, M. E. (2003). Interpersonal forgiveness: Enright’s theoretical process model versus empirical process outcomes. Dissertation Abstracts
International, 63(7-B), 3517.
Neff, K. D. (2003). The development and validation of a scale to measure
self-compassion. Self & Identity, 2, 223–250.
Nolen-Hoeksema, S., Larson, J., & Grayson, C. (1999). Explaining the
gender difference in depressive symptoms. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 77, 1061–1072.
Preacher, K. J., & Hayes, A. F. (2004). SPSS and SAS procedures for
estimating indirect effects in simple mediation models. Behavior Research Methods, Instruments, & Computers, 36, 717–731.
Preacher, K. J., & Hayes, A. F. (2007). Asymptotic and resampling strategies for assessing and comparing indirect effects in simple and multiple
mediator models. Manuscript submitted for publication.
Raskin, R. N., & Terry, H. (1988). A principal-components analysis of the
Narcissistic Personality Inventory and further evidence of its construct
validity. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 54, 890 –902.
Reynolds, W. M. (1982). Development of reliable and valid short forms of
the Marlowe-Crowne Social Desirability Scale. Journal of Clinical
Psychology, 38, 119 –125.
Rosenberg, M. (1965). Society and the adolescent self-image. Princeton,
NJ: Princeton University Press.
Sedikides, C., & Strube, M. J. (1997). Self evaluation: To thine own self be
good, to thine own self be sure, to thine own self be true, and to thine
own self be better. In M. Zanna (Ed.), Advances in experimental social
psychology (Vol. 29, pp. 209 –269). San Diego, CA: Academic.
Singer, T., Seymour, B., O’Doherty, J. P., Stephan, K. E., Dolan, R. J., &
Frith, C. D. (2006). Empathic neural responses are modulated by the
perceived fairness of others. Nature, 439, 466 – 469.
Sobel, M. E. (1982). Asymptotic confidence intervals for indirect effects in
structural equations models. In S. Leinhard (Ed.), Sociological methodology (pp. 290 –312). San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Spence, J. T., & Helmreich, R. L. (1978). Masculinity and femininity: Their
psychological dimensions, correlates, and antecedents. Austin: University of Texas Press.
Steele, C. (1999). The psychology of self-affirmation. New York: Psychology Press.
Stillwell, A. M., & Baumeister, R. F. (1997). The construction of victim
and perpetrator memories: Accuracy and distortion in role-based accounts. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 23, 1157–1172.
Stuckless, N., & Goranson, R. (1992). The vengeance scale: Development
of a measure of attitude toward revenge. Journal of Social Behaviour
and Personality, 7, 25– 42.
Takaku, S. (2001). The effects of apology and perspective taking on
interpersonal forgiveness: A dissonance-attribution model of interpersonal forgiveness. Journal of Social Psychology, 141, 494 –508.
Takaku, S., Weiner, B., & Ohbuchi, K. (2001). A cross-cultural examina-

515

tion of the effects of apology and perspective taking on forgiveness.
Journal of Language and Social Psychology, 20, 144 –166.
Tangney, J. P. (2000). Humility: Theoretical perspectives, empirical findings and directions for future research. Journal of Social and Clinical
Psychology, 19, 70 – 82.
Tangney, J. P. (2002). Humility. In C. R. Snyder & S. J. Lopez (Eds.),
Handbook of positive psychology (pp. 411– 419). Oxford, England:
Oxford University Press.
Tangney, J. P., & Dearing, R. L. (2002). Shame and guilt. New York:
Guilford.
Toussaint, L., & Webb, J. R. (2005). Gender differences in the relationship
between empathy and forgiveness. Journal of Social Psychology, 145,
673– 685.
Tripp, T. M., Bies, R. J., & Aquino, K. (2002). Poetic justice or petty
jealousy? The aesthetics of revenge. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 89, 966 –984.
Wills, T. A. (1981). Downward comparison principles in social psychology. Psychological Bulletin, 90, 245–271.
Witvliet, C. V. O. (2001). Forgiveness and health: Review and reflections
on a matter of faith, feelings, and physiology. Journal of Psychology and
Theology, 29, 212–224.
Witvliet, C. V. O. (2005). Unforgiveness, forgiveness, and justice: Scientific findings on feelings and physiology. In E. L. Worthington, Jr. (Ed.),
Handbook of forgiveness (pp. 305–319). New York: Routledge.
Witvliet, C. V. O., Ludwig, T. E., & Vander Laan, K. L. (2001). Granting
forgiveness or harboring grudges: Implications for emotion, physiology,
and health. Psychological Science, 12, 117–123.
Witvliet, C. V. O., & McCullough, M. E. (2007). Forgiveness and health:
A review and theoretical exploration of emotion pathways. In S. G. Post
(Ed.), Altruism and health: Perspectives from empirical research (pp.
259 –276). Oxford, England: Oxford University Press.
Wohl, M. J. A., & Branscombe, N. R. (2005). Forgiveness and collective
guilt assignment to historical perpetrator groups depend on level of
social category inclusiveness. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 88, 288 –303.
Wood, J. V., Taylor, S., & Lichtman, R. (1985). Social comparison in
adjustment to breast cancer. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 49, 1169 –1183.
Worthington, E. L., Jr. (1998). The pyramid model of forgiveness: Some
interdisciplinary speculations about unforgiveness and the promotion of
forgiveness. In E. L. Worthington, Jr. (Ed.), Dimensions of forgiveness
(pp. 107–137). Philadelphia: Templeton.
Worthington, E. L., Jr. (Ed.). (2005a). Handbook of forgiveness. New
York: Routledge.
Worthington, E. L., Jr. (2005b). More questions about forgiveness: Research agenda for 2005–2015. In E. L. Worthington, Jr. (Ed.), Handbook
of forgiveness (pp. 557–574). New York: Routledge.
Worthington, E. L., Jr., & Scherer, M. (2004). Forgiveness is an emotionfocused coping strategy that can reduce health risks and promote health
resilience: Theory, review, and hypotheses. Psychology and Health, 19,
385– 405.
Zechmeister, J. S., & Romero, C. (2002). Victim and offender accounts of
interpersonal conflict: Autobiographical narratives of forgiveness and unforgiveness. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 82, 675– 686.

Received February 8, 2007
Revision received September 27, 2007
Accepted October 29, 2007 䡲

