Journal of Personality and Social Psychology
2008, Vol. 94, No. 2, 196 –213

Copyright 2008 by the American Psychological Association
0022-3514/08/$12.00 DOI: 10.1037/0022-3514.94.2.94.2.196

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Opening the Mind to Close It: Considering a Message in Light of
Important Values Increases Message Processing and
Later Resistance to Change
Kevin L. Blankenship

Duane T. Wegener

California State University, Fresno

Purdue University

Past research showed that considering a persuasive message in light of important rather than unimportant
values creates attitudes that resist later attack. The traditional explanation is that the attitudes come to
express the value or that a cognitive link between the value and attitude enhances resistance. However,
the current research showed that another explanation is plausible. Similar to other sources of involvement, considering important rather than unimportant values increases processing of the message considered in light of those values. This occurs when the values are identified as normatively high or low
in importance and when the perceived importance differs across participants for the same values. The
increase in processing creates resistance to later attacks, and unlike past research, individual-level
measures of initial amount of processing mediate value importance effects on later resistance to change.
Important values motivate processing because they increase personal involvement with the issue, rather
than creating attitudes that represent or express core values.
Keywords: values, information processing, resistance to persuasion

values have been characterized as a “dominating force in one’s
life” (Allport, 1961, p. 543), and values themselves have been
shown to influence one’s perceptions of reality and to guide both
attitudes and behaviors (Kraus, 1995; Thomsen, Lavine, & Kounios, 1996; Woodruff & Divesta, 1948). As such, connecting an
attitude to an important value has been one common way to create
strong attitudes.
Consistent with the proposed attitude strength, both attitudes
and beliefs linked to values tend to be relatively resistant to various
attempts at change. Behavioral resistance to social pressure has
also been bolstered by the behavior’s relation to values. For
example, social perceivers resist conforming to the behavior of
others when the behavior conflicts with the social perceivers’
values (Schwartz, 1992; Vaughn & Mangan, 1963). As one would
expect, effects of values are enhanced when the values are considered personally important rather than unimportant. For example, Lydon and Zanna (1990) found that research participants were
more committed to a task involving their relationship partner when
the task was described as being linked to their important rather
than unimportant values. In addition, beliefs that have been anchored to a value by writing about the belief–value link more
effectively resist a later message that attacks the belief, compared
with situations in which the belief has not been anchored to the
value (Nelson, 1968). In the attitudes domain, Ostrom and Brock
(1969) manipulated whether the content of a persuasive message
was linked to relatively important or unimportant values. They had
research participants look for and draw links between either important or unimportant values and specific words or phrases in a
persuasive message. When the values were important rather than
unimportant, the resulting attitudes were more resistant to later
attacks on those attitudes (see also Johnson & Eagly, 1989;
Rokeach, 1968).

Attitude theorists have long been interested in attitude strength,
a property of attitudes that has important implications for how
attitudes influence people’s reactions to the world around them
(Petty & Krosnick, 1995). Strong attitudes are those that have
lasting impact. That is, strong attitudes last over time, resist change
when attacked, and influence future thinking and behavior
(Krosnick & Petty, 1995). Thus, practitioners in many domains
have as their goal to create strong attitudes that support their
products, policies, candidates, or other advocated actions.
One well-worn path to a strong attitude is to associate the
attitude with important values. Values are generally described as a
relative ordering of beliefs that serve as trans-situational guides for
evaluative and behavioral concerns (Schwartz & Bilsky, 1987,
1990; see Rohan, 2000, for a review). Rokeach (1968, 1973)
suggested that an attitude’s association with one’s values is an
important consideration in attitude strength and structure. After all,

Kevin L. Blankenship, Department of Psychology, California State
University, Fresno; Duane T. Wegener, Department of Psychological Sciences and The Energy Center at Discovery Park, Purdue University.
The data from Studies 1A and 2 were presented at the Annual Meeting
of the Midwestern Psychological Association, Chicago, Illinois, May 2005.
Studies 3 and 4 were presented at the Seventh Annual Meeting of the
Society for Personality and Social Psychology, Palm Springs, California,
January 2006. The reported research was aided by National Science Foundation Grant BCS 0094510 and by Canadian Institutes of Health Research
Grant MOP– 64197.
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Kevin L.
Blankenship, Department of Psychology, California State University,
Fresno, 5310 North Camps Drive, Fresno, CA 97340, or to Duane T.
Wegener, Purdue Psychological Sciences, 703 Third Street, West Lafayette, IN 47907-2081. E-mail: kblankenship@csufresno.edu or
wegener@psych.purdue.edu
196

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

VALUES, INFORMATION PROCESSING, AND RESISTANCE

The most common explanation for such effects involves a
cognitive link between the attitude and the value. For example,
Ostrom and Brock (1968, 1969) put forth a cognitive model of
attitudinal involvement in which key elements concern the centrality or importance of the value at stake and the relatedness of the
value to the attitude. These two elements were believed to combine
multiplicatively, such that high importance and high relatedness
would result in the greatest attitudinal involvement. Highly involved attitudes were described as being “well imbedded in the
cognitive structure, linked firmly and often with highly central
elements” (Ostrom & Brock, 1968, p. 375). Like Sherif and Cantril
(1947) before them, Ostrom and Brock (1968) expected high levels
of attitudinal involvement to primarily result in high levels of
resistance to persuasion. Because of the links connecting the
attitude and value, change in the attitude would push toward
further cognitive restructuring, and in the tradition of other cognitive consistency theories, the preference for stability and consistency would push the individual to resist change (see also Eagly &
Chaiken, 1993, 1998; Sherif & Hovland, 1961). This egoinvolvement/cognitive structure/cognitive consistency approach
also formed the basis for Johnson and Eagly’s (1989) concept of
value-relevant involvement.
Other related traditions in the attitude change domain are also
consistent with these views. For example, functional theories of
attitudes emphasize the psychological needs met by attitudes. One
common attitude function is expression of one’s values (Katz,
1960; Kristiansen & Zanna, 1988; Maio & Olson, 2000). If an
attitude is perceived as expressing a value that is central to one’s
self-concept, it makes sense that the person would be reluctant to
change that attitude (Nelson, 1968; Ostrom & Brock, 1969). In
fact, Murray, Haddock, and Zanna (1996) characterized the Ostrom and Brock (1969) value-linking procedure as a creation of
value-expressive attitudes and incorporated a linking procedure
into their own manipulation of value-expressive attitudes. Also,
Maio and Olson (1995) directly connected value expression with
value-relevant involvement (Johnson & Eagly, 1989), which was
based in the discussions of involvement by Sherif and Cantril
(1947) and Ostrom and Brock (1968).1
It seems to us, however, that connecting an attitude to a value
(even one with extensive cognitive structure) is not the only
reasonable explanation for resistance stemming from consideration
of values. For example, the concept of involvement can be treated
in a somewhat broader fashion. Petty and Cacioppo (1979, 1986,
1990) defined issue involvement in terms of how important the
attitudinal issue is to the person (see also Apsler & Sears, 1968;
Kiesler, Collins, & Miller, 1969). An issue can be perceived as
important for many reasons. The issue could relate to virtually
anything for which the person cares (the person’s outcomes, values, goals, friends, relatives, possessions, etc.). Thus, the same
factors previously discussed as making the attitude itself involving
(e.g., the attitude being self-defining, Sherif & Cantril, 1947, or
being related to important values, Ostrom & Brock, 1969) would
also make the message topic involving. In this broader conception
of involvement, however, higher levels of issue involvement are
thought to increase information processing, not simply to result in
resistance to change (Petty & Cacioppo, 1979, 1990). This increase
in processing should occur regardless of the source of issue involvement (Petty & Cacioppo, 1986, 1990; see also Boninger,
Krosnick, & Berent, 1995). Therefore, intense information pro-

197

cessing may provide an indirect route through which values could
influence attitude strength in general and resistance to change in
particular. That is, attitudes based on high rather than low levels of
information processing (elaboration) are more likely to last over
time, to resist change, and to guide future thinking and behavior
(Petty, Haugtvedt, & Smith, 1995; Petty & Krosnick, 1995; Wegener, Petty, Smoak, & Fabrigar, 2004). Thus, if consideration of
important values increases processing, it should be possible to
produce strong, resistant attitudes even if the processing does not
produce the kinds of direct connections between the value and the
attitude that have guided most previous discussions of value effects on resistance or attitude strength. That is, resistance might
occur even if attitudes do not become value expressive or are not
viewed as representing one’s core values. It is this new, indirect
route from values to resistance that we examined in the current
research.
The idea that extensive cognitive structure underlying central or
important values can impute strength to other cognitive structures
(including attitudes) that are connected to the value may certainly
still have merit. However, it also seems quite plausible that consideration of important values might get people to think extensively, and existing evidence suggests that high levels of thinking
alone can create strong attitudes (without explicitly connecting the
attitude to a previously existing value or making that attitude
express the value). In fact, some of the original manipulations used
to directly connect values and attitudes might also have prompted
research participants to elaborate on (to think carefully about) the
issue. For example, anchoring beliefs to a value created the most
resistance when people actively participated in the anchoring
(writing about the belief–value link) rather than anchoring in a
more passive manner (Nelson, 1968). Thus, elaboration may have
been an important part of the effectiveness of value anchoring in
creating strong beliefs.
An elaboration component also seems plausible in accounting
for the Ostrom and Brock (1969) attitude resistance effects. Although they discussed involvement as resulting from direct cognitive links between values and attitudes per se, they randomly
assigned various values to be linked to passages from the persuasive message. Thus, the messages were not at all framed as the
attitude supporting, expressing, or even relying on the specific
value under consideration, and attitudes may not have been viewed
as representing or expressing the values at all. Unfortunately,
neither the Nelson (1968) nor the Ostrom and Brock research
measured whether attitudes were perceived as representing or
expressing the values. However, it seems quite possible that consideration of more important values would increase personal involvement with (and therefore effortful processing of) the associated message. If this occurs, it would provide an important
alternative way of thinking about value effects on attitude strength
(cf. Kiesler et al., 1969; Petty & Cacioppo, 1990).

1

Of course, much research on functional views has also emphasized that
linking the counterattitudinal message itself to support for an important
value can enhance the effectiveness of that persuasive message (e.g.,
DeBono, 1987; Murray et al., 1996).

BLANKENSHIP AND WEGENER

198

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Research Overview
Four sets of studies examined the potential role of message
elaboration in creating later resistance to change when the original
message was considered in light of important rather than unimportant values. In general, we propose that consideration of important values 3 issue involvement 3 message processing 3
attitude resistance. Considerable research suggests that involvement can influence message processing and that message processing can influence resistance (e.g., see Wegener et al., 2004).
However, surprisingly little research has addressed whether consideration of important versus unimportant values can influence
issue involvement or message processing, and neither issue involvement nor message processing has been the preferred explanation for how values create resistant attitudes. Thus, key pieces of
the reported research address the links between value consideration and these hypothesized mediating mechanisms.
The first study set (i.e., Studies 1A and 1B) examined whether
consideration of normatively important rather than unimportant
values produces differences in the amount of elaboration of initial
persuasive messages. In Study 1B, amount of elaboration was
examined while also asking participants the extent to which their
attitudes are based on their core values (i.e., questions used in past
research to examine the value relevance of attitudes; e.g., Boninger
et al., 1995; Holbrook, Berent, Krosnick, Visser, & Boninger,
2005). In both studies, we expected that consideration of important
rather than unimportant values should increase elaboration of the
message considered in light of the values. Especially if this occurs
in the absence of attitudes coming to represent or express one’s
core values (in Study 1B), this would suggest that initial message
elaboration per se might be responsible for later resistance to
change. A second study set (i.e., Studies 2A and 2B) controlled for
the fact that considering normatively important versus unimportant
values asks participants to consider different semantic content
within the persuasive message. A third study set tied the elaboration effects back to the resistance outcome that was the focus of
early work on value–attitude connections. Study 3 conceptually
replicated past effects of value consideration on attitude resistance,
and Study 4 examined the mediation of value effects on resistance
by individuals’ level of elaboration. Finally, the fourth set of
studies (i.e., Studies 5A and 5B) examined why consideration of
important values increases amount of processing. These studies
directly measured participants’ level of personal involvement with
the issue to account for why consideration of important values
increases message processing.

(1969; see also Murray et al., 1996) in which participants are
randomly assigned to consider normatively important or unimportant values in relation to a persuasive message about a topic of low
personal relevance to the message recipients. To index the level of
processing of the persuasive message, we created two versions of
the persuasive message, one that contained relatively strong (compelling) arguments and one that contained relatively weak (specious) arguments. When processing is high rather than low, there
should be larger effects of argument quality on attitudes and on the
favorability of thoughts toward the attitude object (see Petty &
Cacioppo, 1986).

Method
Participants and Design
One hundred forty-four introductory psychology students participated in Study 1A, and 79 participated in Study 1B. Students
were randomly assigned to conditions of a 2 (value: important vs.
unimportant) ⫻ 2 (argument quality: strong vs. weak) betweenparticipants design.

Procedure

Studies 1A and 1B

Participants were asked to relate values to a message, reported
attitudes on the topic, and listed the thoughts that came to mind
while reading the message. First, participants received a booklet
presenting a written message containing either strong or weak
arguments arguing that a fictitious country, Tashkentistan, should
be allowed to join the European Union (EU). After viewing the
message for the first time, participants were asked to engage in a
“speech interpretation task.” Participants read three 3- to
4-sentence excerpts (paragraphs) from the message, each listed
separately on a page along with an “idea” (i.e., a value). The value
had been identified in pretests as normatively important or unimportant. Each message paragraph was created such that some
elements were related to both the important and the unimportant
values that were associated (in different conditions) with the
excerpt. For each excerpt, participants were asked to circle the
value and to circle a keyword in the excerpt that was most related
to the value, connecting the two circled words by drawing a line
between them.2 After the speech interpretation task, participants
were asked to report their attitudes toward Tashkentistan entering
the EU and to list the thoughts that came to mind when reading the
message.
Two differences existed between Studies 1A and 1B. Participants in Study 1A (but not Study 1B) were asked to rate how
appropriate the idea (value) was to the excerpt after drawing a link

The crucial mediator in our hypothesized path from values to
resistance is amount of message processing. Message recipients
might think more carefully about the content of a message if they
expect that information to relate to values they hold as relatively
important rather than unimportant (cf. Petty & Cacioppo, 1990).
Our first two experiments addressed whether consideration of a
message in relation to important rather than unimportant values
influences the level of message processing. We expected that
consideration of important values would lead to greater processing
(elaboration) than consideration of unimportant values. To address
this question, we adapted the paradigm used by Ostrom and Brock

2
In addition to adding the argument quality manipulation to the Ostrom
and Brock (1969) paradigm, each message excerpt contained words that
were semantically related to both an unimportant and an important value.
Therefore, when participants looked for a word to circle in the speech
interpretation task, they could find one in both conditions. Because Ostrom
and Brock randomly assigned values to excerpts, there was no guarantee
that there was any semantic content in the passage directly related to the
value. Because of this, in elaboration terms, one could imagine that people
might search harder (in vain) for material related to important rather than
unimportant values. We wanted to avoid this possibility in the current
research.

VALUES, INFORMATION PROCESSING, AND RESISTANCE

between each idea and a word in the excerpt (following Ostrom &
Brock, 1969). This rating ensured that both important and unimportant values were perceived as having equal fit to their associated paragraphs. Also, after reporting their attitudes but before the
thought listing, Study 1B participants were asked to report how
closely their attitudes were related to their core, self-defining
values (using items from a past measure of value-relevance of
attitudes; Boninger et al., 1995; Holbrook et al., 2005).

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Independent Variables
Value importance. In a pretest, three values (adopted from
Schwartz, 1992) were identified as normatively important (i.e.,
self-respect, M ⫽ 8.11; loyalty, M ⫽ 8.15; and freedom, M ⫽ 8.44,
on a 9-point scale with 1 ⫽ not at all important and 9 ⫽ very
important). Three other values were identified as normatively less
important (i.e., wealth, M ⫽ 5.41; social power, M ⫽ 5.70; and
unity, M ⫽ 5.19).
Argument quality. The message contained three arguments
pretested to be either relatively cogent and compelling or relatively
weak and specious in their support of Tashkentistan’s admittance
into the EU (see Petty & Cacioppo, 1986, regarding pretesting
procedures). One example strong argument described a strong
Tashkentistani economy:
The economy has shown improvement in the past few years, and will
continue to show even more if it becomes an EU participant. Unemployment has decreased and independence from government-assisted
living has increased over the past few years, in part due to the
construction of high-quality fishing ports that are capable of bringing
in tons of fish per day.

The argument went on to say that this strong Tashkentistani
economy would benefit the EU. In contrast, in the weak argument
conditions, the Tashkentistani economy could only be viewed as
benefiting from the EU, not the other way around:
Inclusion of a country into the EU leads to a chance at independence
from outside influence, by providing security for the new country and
changing its monetary system into the EU’s. EU members will aid in
the building of new seaside ports, resulting in an extra hundred pounds
of fish caught per week.

However, this EU support for Tashkentistan was also described as
coming at a price to EU countries.
Within each argument, there were words that related to values
pretested as important (i.e., self-respect) and unimportant (i.e.,
wealth). Yet the messages did not explicitly tie support for the
advocacy to any of the values. That is, the messages did not say
that supporting Tashkentistan would support self-respect or would
support wealth. Therefore, the task of linking the value with a
word from the message need not create attitudes viewed as expressing or representing the values.

Dependent Variables
Appropriateness of values. Study 1A participants were asked
to rate how appropriate each value was for its message excerpt
using a 9-point scale (1 ⫽ not at all appropriate, 9 ⫽ very
appropriate).

199

Attitudes. Participants reported their attitude toward Tashkentistan becoming a member of the EU on five semantic 9-point
differential scales (1 ⫽ harmful, foolish, bad, unfavorable, and
undesirable; 9 ⫽ beneficial, wise, good, favorable, and desirable,
respectively), as well as rating how strongly they agreed with the
message (1 ⫽ strongly disagree, 9 ⫽ strongly agree; see Wegener
& Fabrigar, 2004). The Cronbach’s alpha for these six items was
.92 for Study 1A and .94 for Study 1B.
Thought favorability. After completing the attitude measures,
participants completed a thought listing task. Participants were
given 3 min to write down any thoughts they had while reading the
message (see Wegener, Downing, Krosnick, & Petty, 1995, for
specific instructions). Two judges, unaware of condition, categorized participants’ thoughts as positive, negative, or neutral toward
admitting Tashkentistan to the EU. Thought favorability was computed by subtracting the number of negative thoughts from the
number of positive thoughts and dividing by the total number of
thoughts related to the topic. Thought favorability indices for the
two judges were highly correlated (Study 1A, r ⫽ .93; Study 1B,
r ⫽ .89), so they were averaged to form a single measure of
thought favorability.
Value relevance. In Study 1B, after the attitude measure but
before the thought listing, participants were asked to report the
extent to which their attitude was related to their core, personal
values. Similar to Holbrook et al. (2005; see also Boninger et al.,
1995), participants were asked the extent to which Tashkentistan
entering the EU (a) is related to their personal values (1 ⫽ not at
all, 9 ⫽ very much; 1 ⫽ does not at all reflect, 9 ⫽ very much
reflects), (b) is based on the values they care about the most (1 ⫽
not at all, 9 ⫽ very much; 1 ⫽ does not at all reflect, 9 ⫽ very
much reflects), (c) has an impact on the values they care about the
most (1 ⫽ not at all, 9 ⫽ very much; 1 ⫽ does not at all reflect,
9 ⫽ very much reflects), and (d) reflects their core values (1 ⫽ not
at all, 9 ⫽ very much; 1 ⫽ does not at all reflect, 9 ⫽ very much
reflects). The Cronbach’s alpha for the eight items was .95.

Results
Appropriateness of Values
In Study 1A, the rated appropriateness of the important and
unimportant values was compared for each message excerpt. There
were no differences for any of the excerpts (all Fs ⬍ 1.00; across
all values and excerpts, Mimp ⫽ 5.91, Munimp ⫽ 6.01). This
suggests that differences in elaboration were not due to differences
in the appropriateness of the value to the passage across the
important and unimportant value conditions. These appropriateness measures were also included in Studies 2A–5B. Across all
studies, the values were never rated as differentially appropriate
(all Fs ⬍ 1.10).

Attitudes
We expected that the value importance manipulation would
interact with argument quality such that the effect of argument
quality would be larger when participants considered the message
in light of important rather than unimportant values.
A 2 (value: important vs. unimportant) ⫻ 2 (argument quality:
strong vs. weak) analysis of variance (ANOVA) revealed the

BLANKENSHIP AND WEGENER

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

200

predicted Value ⫻ Argument Quality interaction for both Study
1A, F(1, 140) ⫽ 6.04, p ⫽ .016, and Study 1B, F(1, 75) ⫽ 5.78,
p ⫽ .02 (see Table 1). That is, in both studies, the difference
between the strong and weak argument conditions was greater in
the important value conditions than in the unimportant value
conditions. Study 1B also showed a main effect of argument
quality, F(1, 75) ⫽ 5.93, p ⫽ .019, with strong arguments (M ⫽
7.11, SD ⫽ 1.49) leading to more favorable attitudes than weak
arguments (M ⫽ 6.26, SD ⫽ 1.58).3 Across samples, the attitude
results suggest that consideration of a message in light of important rather than unimportant values increased elaboration of the
message. This suggests that differences in elaboration across value
importance conditions might be a potential mechanism to account
for differences in later resistance to change.

Thought Favorability
We expected the favorability of participants’ thoughts to parallel
their attitudes. A 2 (value: important vs. unimportant) ⫻ 2 (argument quality: strong vs. weak) ANOVA revealed the predicted
Value ⫻ Argument Quality interaction in Study 1A, F(1, 140) ⫽
6.72, p ⫽ .01, and Study 1B, F(1, 75) ⫽ 4.32, p ⫽ .04 (see Table
1). In both studies, there was a greater difference between strong
and weak arguments when values were important rather than
unimportant. There was also a main effect of argument quality for
Study 1A, F(1, 140) ⫽ 4.14, p ⬍ .044, and Study 1B, F(1, 75) ⫽
3.95, p ⫽ .049, with participants reporting more favorable
thoughts when arguments were strong rather than weak.

Value Relevance
For Study 1B, a 2 (value: important vs. unimportant) ⫻ 2
(argument quality: strong vs. weak) ANOVA on the value relevance measure revealed no significant effects (Fs ⬍ 0.65). Most
importantly, consideration of important values did not increase the
extent to which attitudes were viewed as representing core values
(M ⫽ 4.34, SD ⫽ 2.09) relative to consideration of unimportant
values (M ⫽ 4.69, SD ⫽ 1.77). This suggests that perceptions of
value relevance were not influenced by the value importance
Table 1
Means, Standard Deviations, and Simple Effects for Attitudes
and Thoughts as a Function of Value Importance and Argument
Quality in Studies 1A and 1B
Argument quality
Study
1A
Attitudes
Thoughts
1B
Attitudes
Thoughts

Values

Strong

Weak

manipulation. In other words, the current paradigm does not create
attitudes that are value expressive or viewed as directly reflecting
the values (cf. Holbrook et al., 2005; Johnson & Eagly, 1989; Maio
& Olson, 1995; Murray et al., 1996; Ostrom & Brock, 1969). In
addition, the measure of value relevance neither moderated the
effect of argument quality on attitudes ( p ⬎ .28) nor predicted
attitudes directly ( p ⬎ .83). In recent research, we have replicated
the message processing effects of value consideration while also
failing to find any differences in rated value relevance of the
resulting attitudes (Blankenship & Wegener, 2007). Thus, we can
be confident that the current paradigm need not create attitudes
perceived as reflecting or expressing the values.

Mediational Analyses
As noted by Petty and Cacioppo (1986), an argument quality
manipulation is intended as an experimental manipulation of participants’ cognitive responses to the persuasive message. Therefore, for Studies 1A and 1B, we expected measures of thought
favorability to mediate argument quality effects. In other words,
Value ⫻ Argument Quality effects would really be due to differences in thought favorability produced when people encounter the
strong or weak arguments while considering important rather than
unimportant values. This produces a form of mediated moderation
(Muller, Judd, & Yzerbyt, 2005; Wegener & Fabrigar, 2000) in
which the Value ⫻ Thought Favorability effect is responsible for
the Value ⫻ Argument Quality effects on attitudes.
The Value ⫻ Argument Quality effect on thought favorability
represents moderation of the front-end effects of argument quality
on thoughts. This effect is consistent with value importance influencing the amount of elaboration of the message arguments. Differences in thought favorability would then carry the impact of
argument quality through to attitudes. Traditionally, these types of
effects have been indexed, in part, by showing that correlations
between thoughts and attitudes are stronger when elaboration is
high rather than low (see Petty & Cacioppo, 1986; Wegener et al.,
1995). In the current analyses, this type of differential relation
between thoughts and attitudes would result in back-end moderation of thought favorability effects on attitudes. Therefore, the
combination of front-end moderation (of argument quality effects
on thoughts) and back-end moderation (of thought effects on
attitudes) provides a strong case for value importance affecting the
level of elaboration. In statistical terms, this pattern of effects is
present if the Value ⫻ Thought term continues to predict attitudes
above and beyond the Value ⫻ Argument Quality term when
predicting attitudes (along with the Value ⫻ Argument Quality
effect on thoughts that has already been reported).

t
Study 1A also included control conditions (n ⫽ 71) in which participants were asked to simply reread the strong or weak message excerpts
instead of considering the paragraph in light of any of the values. Like the
unimportant value conditions, there was no effect of argument quality on
participants’ attitudes (F ⬍ 1.00) or thoughts (F ⬍ 1.50), suggesting that
the topic was of low personal relevance, that the baseline amount of
elaboration was low, and that the value consideration task per se was not
increasing amount of processing (because there were no differences in
effects of argument quality across the control and unimportant value
conditions). The low level of baseline processing creates favorable conditions for testing variables thought to increase amount of processing (see
Petty & Wegener, 1998).
3

*

Important
Unimportant
Important
Unimportant

6.97 (1.24)
5.96 (1.38)
0.41 (0.56)
⫺0.03 (0.65)

6.07 (1.64)
6.29 (1.69)
⫺0.10 (0.74)
0.03 (0.65)

2.64
⫺0.89
3.29*
0.39

Important
Unimportant
Important
Unimportant

7.54 (1.30)
6.74 (1.57)
0.21 (0.56)
⫺0.02 (0.56)

5.79 (1.49)
6.75 (1.65)
⫺0.29 (0.74)
⫺0.01 (0.55)

3.75*
⫺0.20
2.90*
0.07

Note. Standard deviations are in parentheses.
*
p ⬍ .05.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

VALUES, INFORMATION PROCESSING, AND RESISTANCE

To test these possibilities, we conducted the analyses outlined
by Muller et al. (2005; see also Wegener & Fabrigar, 2000). The
first regression analysis replicated the ANOVA results presented
earlier. We centered all predictor variables prior to analysis (Aiken
& West, 1991). As reported earlier, the Value ⫻ Argument Quality
interaction significantly predicted participants’ attitudes, Study
1A, b ⫽ 0.31, t(140) ⫽ 2.46, p ⫽ .015; Study 1B, b ⫽ 0.41,
t(75) ⫽ 2.40, p ⫽ .019. The next analysis examined effects of the
predictor variables on the mediator. As presented earlier, we
obtained a significant Value ⫻ Argument Quality interaction on
thought favorability, Study 1A, b ⫽ 0.43, t(140) ⫽ 4.02, p ⬍ .001;
Study 1B, b ⫽ 0.13, t(75) ⫽ 2.88, p ⬍ .001. Similar to past
analyses of differential thought–attitude correlations (see Petty &
Cacioppo, 1986), when values, thoughts, and the Value ⫻ Thought
interaction were used to predict attitudes, the Value ⫻ Thought
Favorability effect on attitudes was significant, Study 1A, b ⫽
0.52, t(139) ⫽ 2.79 p ⫽ .006; Study 1B, b ⫽ 0.92, t(74) ⫽ 3.14,
p ⫽ .002. The final analysis included effects of all of the distal
predictors on the dependent measure (as reported in the previous
regression effects on the attitude measure) plus the main effect and
interactions involving the mediator (thoughts). In this analysis, the
Value ⫻ Thought Favorability interaction remained strong and
significant, Study 1A, b ⫽ 0.47, t(139) ⫽ 2.44 p ⫽ .016; Study 1B,
b ⫽ 0.65, t(74) ⫽ 2.19, p ⫽ .03, whereas the distal Value ⫻
Argument Quality interaction on attitudes was reduced to nonsignificance, Study 1A, b ⫽ 0.14, t(139) ⫽ 1.40, p ⫽ .18; Study 1B,
b ⫽ 0.25, t(74) ⫽ 1.46 p ⫽ .15. As described by Muller et al.
(2005) and Wegener and Fabrigar (2000), the combination of the
two significant paths (moderation on the front-end influences on
the mediator and moderation on the back-end influences of the
mediator on the dependent measure) support the mediated moderation pattern.4

Discussion
Taken together, the results suggest that consideration of important rather than unimportant values increased message processing.
This occurred even though the resulting attitudes were not viewed
as expressions of the values or as reflections of the participants’
core beliefs. These types of perceptions of value–attitude relations
(or direct cognitive connections between the values and attitudes)
formed the heart of previous discussions of value effects on later
resistance to change (e.g., Holbrook et al., 2005; Maio & Olson,
1995; Ostrom & Brock, 1969; Sherif & Cantril, 1947). Yet past
research did not provide direct evidence of value expression,
perceptions of value relevance, or direct cognitive connections per
se mediating value effects on resistance. Thus, if elaboration of the
initial message mediates value effects on resistance, this would be
the first direct evidence for a mechanism by which consideration
of important values creates later resistance to change. Evidence
that consideration of important rather than unimportant values
increases message processing constitutes an important first step in
arguing for the plausibility of our proposed indirect route from
value importance to resistance (through changes in issue involvement and, therefore, message processing).
Before examining these mediational roles, however, we thought
it prudent to address a primary concern about the first two studies.
Different values were used across the value importance conditions.
Because participants were looking for different semantic content in

201

the message paragraphs, one might wonder whether those semantic
differences per se created the differences in amount of processing.
That is, if some semantic content is easier to find and other content
is harder to find, it could be that these semantic differences happen
to be associated with value importance, rather than importance per
se producing differences in processing. This seems unlikely, given
the use of multiple values and passages across conditions, but the
possibility cannot be ruled out on the basis of the first two studies.

Studies 2A and 2B
The key to addressing semantic differences across values is to
design a study that uses the same values across levels of value
importance. In Studies 2A and 2B, we used the same values for
everyone but measured differences across participants in their
self-rated value importance. If differences in elaboration are created by differences in value importance per se, then the perceptions
of importance should predict processing differences. If, however,
the ease of finding certain semantic content within the messages is
responsible for the previous effects, then the current studies would
produce no differences in processing across levels of perceived
value importance (because the semantics are the same for everyone). This design would also control for other possible differences
across the specific values used, such as priming of concepts related
to motivation, processing, or resistance. We expected that perceptions of value importance would moderate effects of the argument
quality manipulation on thoughts and attitudes, similar to Studies
1A and 1B.

Method
Participants and Design
Forty-four introductory psychology students participated in
Study 2A, and 82 participated in Study 2B. Participants were
randomly assigned to receive the same strong or weak arguments
used in Studies 1A and 1B. Before reading the message, students
in both studies completed measures of the importance of the values
considered later in relation to the message.

Procedure
Procedures were the same as in Studies 1A and 1B with the
following exceptions. Prior to receipt of the message, participants
were asked to rate how important six ideas (i.e., values) were to
them. The values considered in relation to the message (i.e.,
wealth, social power, and unity) were three of the six ideas rated.
These values were used because pretests showed their mean importance ratings were near the midpoint of the scale, and they
displayed a reasonable amount of variability across people. For
each participant, the mean rating of importance across the three
4

An alternative is to test the mediation of the argument quality effect on
attitudes through thoughts at each level of value importance. In the unimportant value conditions, argument quality did not predict participants’
attitudes or thoughts. Also, thoughts failed to reliably predict attitudes.
Thus, no mediational pattern is plausible for unimportant value conditions.
In the important value conditions, however, Sobel tests for the expected
mediational pattern were significant (Study 1A, z ⫽ 2.45, p ⫽ .023; Study
1B, z ⫽ 2.21, p ⫽ .014; see Baron & Kenny, 1986).

BLANKENSHIP AND WEGENER

202

values was used as the index of value importance. For Study 2A,
there was no thought listing after the attitude measures, but Study
2B included both the attitude measures and the thought listing.

Mediational Analyses

Results
Attitudes

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

effects. There was also an effect of argument quality on thoughts,
b ⫽ 0.23, t(78) ⫽ 3.89, p ⬍ .001.

In Study 2A, the Cronbach’s alpha for the six attitude items was
.92. In Study 2B, it was .89. In both studies, we used a simultaneous regression with the argument quality manipulation, the value
importance measure (centered), and their interaction predicting
participants’ attitudes. The predicted Argument Quality ⫻ Importance interaction was significant for Study 2A, b ⫽ 1.00, t(43) ⫽
4.74, p ⬍ .001, and Study 2B, b ⫽ 0.46, t(78) ⫽ 3.01, p ⬍ .005
(see Table 2). At one standard deviation below the mean of value
importance, there was no significant effect of argument quality on
attitudes. In contrast, at one standard deviation above the mean of
value importance, there was a significant effect of argument quality on attitudes. When the value was rated as relatively important,
participants’ amount of elaboration was increased. There were also
argument quality effects on attitudes in Study 2A, b ⫽ 0.76,
t(43) ⫽ 4.23, p ⬍ .001, and Study 2B, b ⫽ 0.43, t(78) ⫽ 2.86, p ⫽
.006.5 Finally, in Study 2A, rated value importance also influenced
attitudes, b ⫽ 0.61, t(43) ⫽ 4.27, p ⬍ .001.

In Study 2B, we expected the same type of mediated moderation
found in Studies 1A and 1B. Using the regression analyses outlined by Muller et al. (2005), the first and second regression
analyses were already presented in the sections on attitude and
thought favorability. In both cases, there were significant Value
Importance ⫻ Argument Quality interactions. As in the previous
studies, when using only thoughts, value importance, and their
interaction to predict attitudes, there was a significant Value ⫻
Thoughts interaction on attitudes, b ⫽ 1.10, t(76) ⫽ 3.43, p ⬍
.001. The final analysis included effects of all of the distal predictors of attitudes (as reported previously) plus the main effect of the
mediator (thoughts) and a Value ⫻ Thought Favorability interaction. In this analysis, the Value Importance ⫻ Thought Favorability interaction remained strong and significant, b ⫽ 0.90, t(76) ⫽
2.85, p ⫽ .006, whereas the distal Value Importance ⫻ Argument
Quality interaction on attitudes was substantially reduced, b ⫽
0.18, t(76) ⫽ 0.54, p ⫽ .59. These results were consistent with
mediated moderation.

Discussion
Thought Favorability
In Study 2B, the favorability of thoughts was coded in the same
manner as in Studies 1A and 1B by one of the same coders
(unaware of argument quality condition or value importance ratings). A simultaneous regression with the argument quality manipulation, the value importance measure (centered), and their
interaction predicting participants’ thoughts revealed the predicted
Argument Quality ⫻ Value Importance interaction, b ⫽ 0.23,
t(78) ⫽ 3.83, p ⬍ .001 (see Table 2). At one standard deviation
below the mean of value importance, there was no significant
effect of argument quality on thoughts. In contrast, at one standard
deviation above the mean of value importance, there was a significant effect of argument quality on thought favorability. These
results replicate the results of Studies 1A and 1B and provide
additional evidence for the role of elaboration in value importance
Table 2
Predicted Values and Simple Effects for Attitudes and Thoughts
as a Function of Value Importance and Argument Quality in
Studies 2A and 2B

As predicted, participants’ own perceptions of value importance
determined the amount of processing of the persuasive message.
This occurred despite the fact that all participants considered the
same values, thereby equating the semantic content they sought in
the message. These results provide further support for value importance per se being responsible for the results in Studies 1A and
1B. Taken together, the first four studies provide reasonable evidence that consideration of a message in light of important values
can increase processing of that message. This provides crucial, but
only partial, support for our proposed indirect route from value
importance to resistance (through issue involvement and message
processing). In the studies to follow, therefore, we wished to
examine the impact of value importance on later resistance to
change and the possible mediational role of elaboration (message
processing). Random assignment of participants to consider important versus unimportant values should equate the value importance conditions on background factors that might influence the
extent to which people elaborate or resist change. Therefore,
despite the utility of measuring people’s perceptions of value
importance in Studies 2A and 2B, we went back to the experimental manipulation of value importance for Studies 3–5B.

Argument quality
Study
2A
Attitudes
2B
Attitudes
Thoughts
*

p ⬍ .05.

Value importance

Strong

Weak

t

(1 SD ⫽ 6.70)
(⫺1 SD ⫽ 4.50)

6.98
6.46

5.75
6.56

2.45*
⫺0.21

(1 SD ⫽ 7.72)
(⫺1 SD ⫽ 5.02)
(1 SD ⫽ 7.72)
(⫺1 SD ⫽ 5.02)

7.46
6.75
0.65
0.33

5.36
6.80
⫺0.17
0.25

3.35*
⫺0.12
4.77*
1.01

5
When collapsing across participants in Studies 1A and 1B who considered the same values, there were no argument quality effects. It is
possible that rating the values prior to receiving the value–message pairs
might increase processing, especially for values perceived as important (by
drawing attention to the importance of the values). This would also
increase the observed main effect of argument quality. In addition, the
average rated value importance was higher than in the value pretests,
especially for Study 2B, where argument quality effects were largest.
These effects are consistent with the Value Importance ⫻ Argument
Quality interactions that replicate in every study where value importance is
measured or manipulated along with an argument quality manipulation.

VALUES, INFORMATION PROCESSING, AND RESISTANCE

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Study 3
The data presented thus far do not directly address value effects
on resistance to change. Because the current paradigm differs in
some ways from past studies of values and resistance, we thought
it best to use the current paradigm to conceptually replicate previous value–resistance effects. Then, we could seek evidence that
these effects are mediated by the differences in elaboration demonstrated in the previous studies. Thus, Study 3 was intended to
conceptually replicate the resistance results from Ostrom and
Brock (1969) using the current procedures.
An ideal test of elaboration effects on resistance requires that
initial attitudes differ in the level of elaboration that went into
establishing the attitudes without differing in other ways that
would confound the comparison (Petty et al., 1995). Chief among
these possible confounds would be differences in extremity of the
initial attitudes. For example, if high-elaboration attitudes were
more resistant to change but also started out being less extreme
than initial low-elaboration attitudes, critics might reasonably note
that the resistance result might have occurred because the highelaboration attitudes were less discrepant from the attacking message (i.e., they had less possible room for change). Alternatively,
if initial high-elaboration attitudes were more extreme than initial
low-elaboration attitudes, increased resistance of high-elaboration
attitudes might be attributed to the greater extremity per se (another common antecedent of attitude strength; Abelson, 1995).
To create initial attitudes of equal extremity, we adjusted the
persuasive communications used in the previous studies. We added
positive information about the source of the initial message. In our
earlier studies, no information had been given about the writer of the
message. However, in the current study, the initial message was
attributed to a highly expert source. This information on source
expertise should especially increase the favorability of initial attitudes
in the low-processing (i.e., unimportant value) conditions (see
Chaiken & Maheswaran, 1994; Petty, Cacioppo, & Goldman, 1981).
By increasing the favorability of attitudes when the message is considered in light of unimportant values, the extremity of attitudes may
be equal across important and unimportant values when the arguments in the initial message are strong.
Thus, for Study 3, all participants received the same strong
arguments as in the previous studies. After creating equally extreme initial attitudes across levels of value importance, we exposed participants to a counterattitudinal message arguing against
admittance of Tashkentistan to the EU. We expected that conditions leading to higher levels of processing in the preceding studies
(i.e., high value importance) would create greater resistance to the
second, attacking message. This would result in an interaction
between the importance of the value considered during the initial
message and the time of attitude measurement. There should be no
difference in initial attitudes, but after the second message (arguing
against admission of Tashkentistan), there should be less favorable
attitudes toward admitting Tashkentistan to the EU when values
had been unimportant rather than important.

Method
Participants and Design
One hundred five introductory psychology students were randomly assigned to consider either important or unimportant values

203

in a 2 (value: important vs. unimportant) ⫻ 2 (time: initial vs.
postattack) mixed design with value as a between-participants
factor and time as a within-participants factor.

Procedure
As in the previous studies, participants read a message supporting the admittance of Tashkentistan to the EU. As noted earlier,
participants were given information about the writer of the message that had not been provided in the earlier studies. When
encountering the first message, participants learned that Dr. Endelshone, a professor in the Finance Department at the University
of Zurich and cochair of the committee examining Tashkentistan’s
application for admittance to the EU, approved of Tashkentistan’s
admittance. This information provided a positive cue that could
increase favorability of attitudes in the unimportant value conditions, thereby equating the favorability of initial attitudes across
value conditions. After reading the brief description of the message
source, participants completed the same speech interpretation task
linking each value to specific words in the strong argument message from the previous studies. Participants were then asked to
report their attitudes using the same set of items listed earlier
(Cronbach’s ␣ ⫽ .82). Consistent with previous resistance studies,
thoughts about the initial message were not collected, so the level
of elaboration was not artificially increased in conditions where
low levels of thinking would have been the natural result (i.e.,
unimportant value conditions; see Petty et al., 1995, for discussion).
After reporting their initial attitudes toward the proposal, participants read an attacking message written by the other cochair of
the committee (Dr. Dijksterhuis), who was said to believe that
Tashkentistan should not be admitted into the EU. This attacking
message consisted of relatively weak arguments that countered the
strong arguments used in the initial message. For example, regarding the economy of Tashkentistan, Dr. Dijksterhuis claimed,
Initial estimates used to show improvement in the unemployment rate
were based on incomplete information. For example, only 189 of the
192 major businesses in Tashkentistan had reported their employment
statistics, leaving three businesses unaccounted for. These three major
businesses might be laying off workers, which could change the
unemployment rate by as much as a half percentage point overall.

After the attacking message, participants reported their attitudes
using the same six items as for initial attitudes (Cronbach’s ␣ ⫽
.92) and were asked to list thoughts that came to mind while
reading the attacking message. Finally, participants were debriefed
and dismissed.

Results
Attitudes
There should be no differences in participants’ initial attitudes
across the value importance conditions, but participants’ attitudes
in the important value conditions should better resist the attacking
message than attitudes in the unimportant value conditions. Thus,
we expected a Value ⫻ Time interaction on attitudes. A 2 (value:
important vs. unimportant) ⫻ 2 (time: initial vs. postattack) mixeddesign ANOVA revealed the predicted Value ⫻ Time interaction,
F(1, 103) ⫽ 10.42, p ⫽ .002. There was no difference in partici-

BLANKENSHIP AND WEGENER

204

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

pants’ initial attitudes across the value importance conditions
(unimportant M ⫽ 6.73, SD ⫽ 1.05, vs. important M ⫽ 6.61, SD ⫽
1.23), t(103) ⫽ .32, p ⫽ .58. Yet, after the attacking message,
attitudes were less favorable in the unimportant (M ⫽ 5.23, SD ⫽
1.63) rather than important (M ⫽ 6.03, SD ⫽ 1.05) value conditions, t(103) ⫽ 7.23, p ⫽ .008. These results replicate the results
found by Ostrom and Brock (1969), providing a necessary step in
exploring the possible mediational role of elaboration in value
bonding effects on resistance. There was also an effect of time,
F(1, 103) ⫽ 52.14, p ⬍ .001, with participants’ attitudes more
favorable initially (M ⫽ 6.67, SD ⫽ 1.14) than they were after
reading the attacking message (M ⫽ 5.60, SD ⫽ 1.57).

Thoughts During the Attacking Message
After the postattack attitude measure, participants were asked to
write down any thoughts they had while reading the second,
attacking message. Thoughts were coded as positive when they
supported Tashkentistan joining the EU and negative when they
opposed Tashkentistan joining the EU. As in the previous studies,
an index of thought favorability was created by taking the number
of thoughts favorable toward Tashkentistan joining the EU, subtracting the number of thoughts unfavorable toward Tashkentistan
joining the EU, and dividing by the total number of thoughts. A
one-way ANOVA revealed an effect of value, F(1, 103) ⫽ 6.88,
p ⫽ .011, with participants who initially considered important
values reporting more positive thoughts toward Tashkentistan joining the EU (M ⫽ 0.65, SD ⫽ 0.61) than in the unimportant value
conditions (M ⫽ 0.30, SD ⫽ 0.73). The thought measure partially
mediated the effects of value on resistance (Sobel z ⫽ ⫺2.09, p ⫽
.037), suggesting that the resistance in Study 3 was an active type
of resistance in which participants defended their initial point of
view in relatively thoughtful ways (for discussion of thoughtful
and nonthoughtful forms of resistance, see Wegener et al., 2004).

Discussion
Study 3 presented an attacking message and replicated the
resistance effects of Ostrom and Brock (1969) using the current
materials and procedure. Thus, the same manipulation of value
importance that created differences in message processing in Studies 1A and 1B also created differences in resistance of the attitudes
to attack in Study 3. Thus, consistent with our issue-involvementbased approach, the results thus far suggest that the observed
differences in message processing might be responsible for the
observed differences in attitude resistance. These cross-study comparisons provide evidence that is typical of past studies of elaboration and attitude strength. That is, a manipulation or measure
hypothesized to enhance elaboration (e.g., manipulations of personal relevance of the message topic, Petty et al., 1981, or of
distraction, Petty, Wells, & Brock, 1976, or a measure of need for
cognition, Cacioppo, Petty, & Morris, 1983) is shown to do so.
Then, the same manipulation or measure is used to create initial
attitudes of equal extremity that are influenced differently by an
attacking message (e.g., Haugtvedt & Petty, 1992; Petty et al.,
1995; see also Haugtvedt & Wegener, 1994; Wegener et al., 2004).
Although the evidence is suggestive of elaboration effects on
resistance, individuals’ level of elaboration has not been assessed
or used as a mediator of distal variable effects on resistance. Study

4 was designed to produce direct mediational evidence of elaboration as a mediator of value importance effects on attitude resistance.

Study 4
Elaboration has been hypothesized to mediate effects of many
motivation and ability variables on attitude strength outcomes
(Petty & Cacioppo, 1986; Petty et al., 1995; Wegener et al., 2004).
Yet, in these past studies, the role of elaboration has been implied
through comparisons across participants and across studies, rather
than being analyzed as a within-participants measure or mediator.
This may be true, in part, because the most popular indicators of
amount of processing (e.g., thought–attitude correlations, argument quality effects on attitudes) are generally created as betweenparticipants indices (see Wegener et al., 1995). To provide more
direct evidence of elaboration mediating value importance effects
on resistance, we used a within-participant measure of elaboration
based on a within-participant manipulation of argument quality (cf.
Erb, Bohner, Rank, & Einwiller, 2002; Erb, Bohner, Schalzle, &
Rank, 1998).
In making a case for the mediational role of elaboration per se,
one might also want to control for beliefs about one’s level of
elaboration. For example, one could imagine some cases in which
the mere belief that one has thought a lot rather than a little could
get people to hang onto the attitude that was based on much rather
than little thought. Although these effects of elaboration would be
of scientific interest, similar effects could occur without any differences in actual elaboration, as long as people could be convinced that they thought much rather than little (e.g., Barden,
2006). A similar situation has recently been studied regarding the
confidence people have in their attitudes. That is, higher levels of
elaboration can increase confidence (Chaiken, Liberman, & Eagly,
1989), and higher levels of confidence can increase resistance to
later attacking messages (Bassili, 1996; Tormala & Petty, 2002).
Yet different levels of confidence can also be created without
differences in elaboration by telling people that they successfully
resisted strong versus weak arguments against their current position (e.g., Tormala & Petty, 2002). Therefore, in providing evidence of elaboration per se increasing resistance, it seemed prudent
to measure and control for beliefs about the amount of processing
in which one engaged, as well as the amount of confidence
message recipients had in their attitudes prior to the attack.

Method
Participants and Design
One hundred forty-four introductory psychology students participated in a 2 (value: important vs. unimportant) ⫻ 2 (argument
quality: strong vs. weak) ⫻ 2 (time: initial vs. postattack) ⫻ 2
(order of arguments: strong/weak/strong/weak vs. weak/strong/
weak/strong) mixed design. Argument quality and time were
within-participants factors, and value and order were betweenparticipant factors.

Procedure
Study 4 combined the resistance procedure from Study 3 with
aspects of the processing studies (i.e., an argument quality manip-

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

VALUES, INFORMATION PROCESSING, AND RESISTANCE

ulation in the initial message, but this time within-participants).
Participants first received the same source from Study 3 presenting
an initial message supporting Tashkentistan’s admittance to the
EU. Participants engaged in the same speech interpretation task as
in the previous studies. To create individual-level indices of elaboration, participants received a message containing two strong and
two weak arguments. By later assessing judgments related to each
of the arguments, we were able to index the level of elaboration for
each individual.
During the speech interpretation task, two important or unimportant values were related to the message, each value being linked
to one of the strong argument passages and to one of the weak
argument passages. After considering the message in light of either
important or unimportant values, participants evaluated the support
for Tashkentistan joining the EU in each of the four arguments.
After evaluating the arguments, participants were asked to report
how confident they were in their evaluations and how much
cognitive effort they exerted in reading the message.
The central data from these initial dependent measures should
parallel the data from the previous amount-of-processing studies
(Studies 1A–2B). That is, the dimensions associated with strong
arguments should be evaluated more favorably than the dimensions associated with weak arguments, especially when participants considered important rather than unimportant values.
Similar to Study 3, after the initial dependent measures, participants read a second (attacking) message that opposed Tashkentistan’s admittance to the EU. The attacking message was attributed to the same source used with the attacking message in Study
3. As in Study 3, the attack was tailored to contain relatively weak
arguments that countered the claims associated with strong support
in the initial message. Because initial evaluations should be
equated only for dimensions initially supported by strong arguments (as in Study 3), the attacking message and postattack dependent measures addressed only those dimensions that were
initially supported by strong arguments.
After reading the attacking message, participants evaluated the
support for Tashkentistan entering the EU along the dimensions in
the attacking message (i.e., the same dimensions supported by
strong arguments in the initial message and then attacked by
relatively weak arguments in the attacking message). Participants
used the same evaluation measures as when they evaluated the
same dimensions after the initial message. Finally, participants
were debriefed and dismissed.

Independent Variables
Argument quality. Each participant received two strong, compelling arguments and two weak, specious arguments in favor of
Tashkentistan becoming a member of the EU. Each argument
addressed a different dimension along which Tashkentistan’s admittance could be supported, and dimensions were always addressed in the same order (though order of the strength of arguments varied across participants). One strong argument and one
weak argument were paired with each (important or unimportant)
value. Each argument included two related facets that formed the
basis for later evaluations. One argument addressed the family
connections and worldwide alliances existing in Tashkentistan. A
second argument addressed national pride and perceived similarity
with EU countries. The third argument addressed strength of the

205

Tashkentistani economy and financial independence of the country. The final argument addressed food safety and livestock quality.
For example, participants who received a strong argument about
Tashkentistani standards for food safety/livestock quality learned
the following:
Tashkentistan is at the forefront of food safety, by setting down strict
guidelines about livestock quality (most of which meet or exceed
international standards). . . . As a result, 97% of dairy and beef cattle
farmers have passed international food safety regulations and reports
of unhealthy and sick livestock have decreased to a low 2%.

Participants who received a weak food safety/livestock quality
argument read that
Tashkentistan is near the top of food safety in some parts of the world,
by setting down strict guidelines about livestock quality (most of
which meet third world country standards). . . . As a result, 9% of
dairy and beef cattle farmers have passed international food safety
regulations and reports of unhealthy and sick livestock have decreased
to 38%.

As noted earlier, participants considered one strong and one
weak argument in light of each (important or unimportant) value
during the speech interpretation task. The order of the strong and
weak arguments was counterbalanced such that half of the participants received arguments in a strong/weak/strong/weak order,
whereas the other half received arguments in a weak/strong/weak/
strong order.
Value importance. Each participant used two of the important
values or two of the unimportant values used in the previous
studies, with each value considered with one of the strong initial
arguments and with one of the weak initial arguments. Participants
in the important (unimportant) value conditions were asked to
consider loyalty (unity) when receiving arguments about Tashkentistan’s family connections/worldwide alliances and national pride/
similarity to EU countries and were asked to consider freedom
(wealth) when receiving arguments about Tashkentistan’s economy/financial independence and food safety/livestock quality.

Dependent Variables
Initial evaluations. After reading the initial message and engaging in the speech interpretation task, participants were asked to
evaluate the support provided by each of the arguments. Participants rated each of the eight facets (two per argument) in terms of
the extent to which it would be (a) useful and (b) advantageous for
the EU to have a country with Tashkentistan’s qualities (i.e.,
worldwide alliances, tradition of family connections, feeling of a
common bond with other EU countries, amount of national pride,
economy, level of financial independence, food safety standards,
and livestock quality, respectively). All ratings were made on a
9-point scale (1 ⫽ not at all useful/not at all advantageous, 9 ⫽
very useful/very advantageous). Correlations between the two
items for each facet ranged between .70 and .82, and the four
measures for each argument were averaged to form a composite
measure for that argument. Cronbach’s alphas for each of the four
arguments (combining the four items across the two facets for each
argument) ranged from .81 to .91.

BLANKENSHIP AND WEGENER

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

206

The initial argument evaluations were also used to create an
index of amount of elaboration of the initial message. Recall that
between-participant assessments of elaboration often use argument
quality effects on attitudes as the indicator of the amount of
elaboration. We computed a within-participant index of elaboration based on differences in evaluations across the dimensions that
were supported by strong versus weak arguments. This
differential-evaluation index was created by averaging the evaluations of strong argument dimensions and subtracting the average
evaluation of weak argument dimensions.
Confidence. After rating all of the arguments, participants
were asked to rate on two 9-point scales how confident and how
certain they were about their beliefs regarding Tashkentistan becoming part of the EU (1 ⫽ not at all certain/not at all confident,
9 ⫽ very certain/very confident; Tormala & Petty, 2002). The
correlation between the two items was .84, and the ratings were
averaged to form a composite measure of confidence.
Self-reported amount of elaboration. Participants responded
to three items designed to assess their own perceptions of their
amount of elaboration (Petty, Briñol, & Tormala, 2002). Participants were asked to report how much attention they paid to the
message (1 ⫽ no attention at all, 9 ⫽ a lot of attention), how much
effort they put into reading the message (1 ⫽ no effort at all, 9 ⫽
a lot of effort), and how deeply they thought about the issue (1 ⫽
not deeply at all, 9 ⫽ very deeply). Cronbach’s alpha for the scale
was .85, and the ratings were averaged to form a composite
measure of self-reported amount of elaboration.
Postattack evaluations. After the attacking message, participants were asked to evaluate the support for Tashkentistan entering
the EU on the same four facets (two per argument) that were
addressed by the attacking message using the same measures as in
the initial evaluations. Correlations between the two items for each
facet ranged between .71 and .92, and the four measures for each
argument (two per facet) were averaged to form a composite
measure for that argument (Cronbach’s alphas for each argument,
collapsing across the two facets in each argument, ranged from .88
to .92).

Results
Initial Evaluations
Consideration of important rather than unimportant values
should create higher levels of elaboration. This should create larger
differences between strong and weak argument dimensions when
values are important rather than unimportant (a Value ⫻ Argument
Quality interaction). A 2 (value: important vs. unimportant) ⫻ 2
(argument quality: strong vs. weak) ⫻ 2 (order of arguments:
strong first vs. weak first) mixed-design ANOVA revealed that the
predicted Value ⫻ Argument Quality interaction was significant,
F(1, 140) ⫽ 6.48, p ⬍ .001. Argument quality influenced initial
evaluations to a greater extent when the message was considered in
light of important (strong M ⫽ 6.55, SD ⫽ 1.38, vs. weak M ⫽
6.11, SD ⫽ 1.29), t(69) ⫽ 2.50, p ⫽ .016, rather than unimportant
values (strong M ⫽ 6.41, SD ⫽ 1.35, vs. weak M ⫽ 6.18, SD ⫽
1.33), t(75) ⫽ 1.31, p ⫽ .19. Thus, similar to previous studies,
consideration of important values increased participants’ elaboration of the initial message. There was also an overall main effect
of argument quality, F(1, 140) ⫽ 5.65, p ⫽ .02, with qualities of

Tashkentistan supported by strong arguments being rated more
favorably (M ⫽ 6.48, SD ⫽ 1.36) than qualities supported by weak
arguments (M ⫽ 6.15, SD ⫽ 1.31).6 All results reported for the
evaluations remain the same when the measures are standardized
within each facet across levels of order instead of using raw
ratings.7

Participant Perceptions of Elaboration and Confidence
A 2 (value: important vs. unimportant) ⫻ 2 (order of arguments:
strong first vs. weak first) ANOVA yielded no significant effects
on participants’ perceptions of elaboration (Fs ⬍ 1.50) or confidence in their evaluations (Fs ⬍ 1.00). Therefore, any effects of
elaboration on resistance occur above and beyond differences in
perceived amount of elaboration or in confidence. All of the
mediational analyses revealed the same results when controlling
for perceptions of effort or confidence.

Resistance to Change
Similar to Study 3, when dimensions initially supported by
strong arguments are attacked, evaluations of the dimensions
should be more resistant to change when the evaluations are based
on high rather than low levels of elaboration (i.e., when considered
values are important rather than unimportant). This would result in
a Value ⫻ Time interaction. Evaluations of the dimensions associated with strong arguments in the initial message were examined
both initially and after the attacking message. We submitted evaluations to a 2 (value: unimportant vs. important) ⫻ 2 (order: strong
first vs. weak first) ⫻ (time: initial vs. postattack) mixed-design
ANOVA.
The predicted Value ⫻ Time interaction was significant, F(1,
140) ⫽ 6.96, p ⫽ .01. As intended, there was no difference in
initial evaluations across the unimportant and important value
conditions (Mimp ⫽ 6.55, SD ⫽ 1.38; Munimp ⫽ 6.41, SD ⫽ 1.35),
6
Though not the focus of the study, there were some effects of argument
order. A main effect of order, F(1, 140) ⫽ 5.70, p ⫽ .02, revealed more
positive initial evaluations when strong arguments were presented first and
third (M ⫽ 6.54, SD ⫽ 1.04) rather than second and fourth (M ⫽ 6.10,
SD ⫽ 1.39). There was also greater impact of argument quality when
strong arguments were presented first and third (strong M ⫽ 6.87, SD ⫽
1.04, vs. weak M ⫽ 6.21, SD ⫽ 1.49), F(1, 72) ⫽ 31.80, p ⬍ .001, rather
than second and fourth (strong M ⫽ 6.20, SD ⫽ 1.22, vs. weak M ⫽ 5.90,
SD ⫽ 1.39), F(1, 70) ⫽ 1.52, p ⫽ .23; Argument Quality ⫻ Order
interaction, F(1, 140) ⫽ 28.20, p ⬍ .001. Finally, there was a Value ⫻
Argument Quality ⫻ Order interaction, F(1, 140) ⫽ 5.46, p ⬍ .01, such
that the expected Value ⫻ Argument Quality interaction was stronger
when strong arguments were first and third rather than second and fourth.
Yet the predicted Value ⫻ Argument Quality interaction was significant
both when strong arguments were first and third, F(1, 71) ⫽ 6.35, p ⬍ .01,
and second and fourth, F(1, 69) ⫽ 4.58, p ⫽ .024.
7
Participants were also asked to list thoughts about each facet described
in the arguments (after judgments of confidence and amount of elaboration). Favorability of thoughts was calculated for each argument. Argument
quality influenced thoughts to a greater extent when values were important
(strong M ⫽ 0.66, SD ⫽ 0.66, vs. weak M ⫽ 0.13, SD ⫽ 0.30), t(69) ⫽
3.19, p ⫽ .003, rather than unimportant (strong M ⫽ 0.47, SD ⫽ 0.53, vs.
weak M ⫽ 0.22, SD ⫽ 0.41), t(75) ⫽ 1.31, p ⫽ .19; Value ⫻ Argument
Quality, F(1, 140) ⫽ 5.36, p ⫽ .019.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

VALUES, INFORMATION PROCESSING, AND RESISTANCE

F(1, 142) ⫽ 1.92, p ⫽ .26 This appropriately set the stage for
examining differential change in reaction to the attack. Postattack
evaluations were less affected by the attacking message when
initial evaluations had been formed while considering important
(M ⫽ 5.27, SD ⫽ 1.63) rather than unimportant values (M ⫽ 4.58,
SD ⫽ 1.67), F(1, 142) ⫽ 14.06, p ⬍ .001. These results conceptually replicated Study 3 (and Ostrom & Brock, 1969) and extended the previous findings by showing in the same study that the
factor influencing amount of processing of the initial message also
produced differential resistance to the attacking message. In addition to the crucial interaction, there was a less important main
effect of time, F(1, 140) ⫽ 161.30, p ⬍ .0001. After the initial
strong pro-Tashkentistan arguments, participants rated Tashkentistan’s qualities on those dimensions to be quite positive for the
EU (M ⫽ 6.42, SD ⫽ 1.34). After the weak attacking message,
however, participants did not believe that Tashkentistan’s qualities
were as positive for the EU (M ⫽ 4.93, SD ⫽ 1.72). No other
effects were significant (Fs ⬍ 1.00).

207

to important rather than unimportant values. This seems quite
plausible given previous discussions of issue involvement that
connect issue involvement to settings in which people perceive the
topic as related to anything they care about (objects, people,
values, etc.; see Kiesler et al., 1969; Petty & Cacioppo, 1979,
1986, 1990). However, to this point, we had no measures directly
linking amount of processing to involvement per se. Also, in past
involvement and processing research, the data directly linking
involvement with processing have manipulated the personal relevance of the message topic, which is hypothesized to be one
primary source of involvement (e.g., Petty & Cacioppo, 1979,
1990; Petty et al., 1981). However, in the current case, there was
little reason to believe that the Tashkentistan message was perceived as any more personally relevant to participants when considering important values. Thus, it seemed important to directly
address the potential for consideration of values to influence
involvement and, through involvement, amount of message processing.

Studies 5A and 5B

Mediational Analyses
Evidence of elaboration effects on resistance would complete
the mediational chain from value importance through message
processing to resistance. This would also constitute the most direct
evidence to date of elaboration per se producing attitudes that
resist later attempts at change. The differential-evaluation measure
served as the index of the level of elaboration for each participant.
Attitude resistance was indexed as the difference between initial
and postattack evaluations. The resistance measure was first regressed on value importance. Replicating the ANOVA results,
value importance significantly predicted resistance, b ⫽ ⫺0.45,
t(142) ⫽ ⫺2.50, p ⫽ .01. Important values led to more resistance
(less change). Value importance also predicted the differentialevaluation index of elaboration of the initial message, b ⫽ 1.00,
t(142) ⫽ 5.77, p ⬍ .001, with important values leading to greater
elaboration. When both value importance and the differentialevaluation index of elaboration predicted resistance, the value
importance effect dropped to nonsignificance, b ⫽ ⫺0.22,
t(141) ⫽ ⫺0.90, p ⫽ .38. The differential-evaluation measure of
elaboration, however, continued to predict attitude resistance to
change, b ⫽ ⫺0.23, t(141) ⫽ ⫺2.15, p ⫽ .034 (Sobel z ⫽ 2.53,
p ⫽ .011).8

As noted earlier, people are hypothesized to be more personally
involved in an issue whenever the issue is thought to address
something important to the person (values, outcomes, possessions,
people; Petty & Cacioppo, 1990). Although values have been
previously noted as one possible source of issue involvement, few
data directly address this possibility. To date, the data that come
closest to addressing this question show that attitude importance is
higher when the attitude is viewed as reflecting or as based on
one’s core values (e.g., Boninger et al., 1995; Holbrook et al.,
2005). Yet, as noted earlier, in the current setting, there was no
evidence that participant attitudes were viewed as reflecting or
expressing participants’ values. Thus, there were no existing data
that directly supported our proposed explanation of value effects
on message processing as stemming from value effects on issue
involvement per se. Therefore, in Studies 5A and 5B, we included
a measure of issue involvement to test whether consideration of
important values increases issue involvement, which in turn influences amount of thinking about the message (i.e., elaboration).

Discussion

Two hundred sixty-one introductory psychology students participated in Study 5A, and 124 participated in Study 5B. Students

Study 4 replicated and extended previous research by showing
in the same study that consideration of important rather than
unimportant values during initial message processing increased
elaboration of that message as well as resistance to a later attack.
Value effects on resistance were also mediated by participants’
amount of elaboration of that first message (indexed by differences
in evaluations across dimensions associated with strong vs. weak
arguments). To our knowledge, this is the first study to provide
experimental evidence of elaboration per se mediating effects of
any distal variable (in this case, value importance) on resistance to
change.
As described previously, we assume that consideration of important values increases processing because participants become
more involved with the issue when considering the issue in relation

Method
Participants and Design

8
Similar mediation results also occur when using a differential-thoughts
index of each person’s level of elaboration (by taking a difference between
thoughts listed about dimensions described by strong vs. weak arguments;
Sobel z ⫽ 1.69, p ⫽ .09). However, because thoughts often mediate effects
of argument quality on attitudes, it may be that these two measures actually
represent sequential points in the causal progression (from value importance 3 differential thoughts 3 differential evaluations 3 resistance to
change). Regressions showed that the differential-thought measure significantly mediated effects of value importance on differential evaluations
(Sobel z ⫽ 2.44, p ⬍ .015; see Baron & Kenny, 1986). Also, the
differential-evaluation measure significantly mediated the effects of differential thoughts on resistance (Sobel z ⫽ 2.23, p ⬍ .026). Thus, this causal
ordering seems plausible.

208

BLANKENSHIP AND WEGENER

were randomly assigned to conditions in a 2 (value: important vs.
unimportant) ⫻ 2 (argument quality: strong vs. weak) betweenparticipants design.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Procedure
Participants gathered in a classroom in groups of 2 to 15 and
received booklets describing the same cover story and speech
interpretation task as in the previous amount-of-processing studies.
After the speech interpretation task, participants were asked to
report their attitudes toward the topic and to rate how important the
issue was to them. Finally, participants were debriefed and dismissed. The only difference between Studies 5A and 5B was the
message topic. The topic for Study 5A was the same as that used
in previous studies (i.e., Tashkentistan entering the EU). However,
Study 5B used a message advocating the building of nuclear power
plants in Canada.

Independent Variables
Value importance. Participants were randomly assigned to
consider the message in light of either the important or unimportant values used in Studies 1A, 1B, and 3.
Argument quality. Half of the participants received strong
arguments, and half received weak arguments. Participants in
Study 5A received the same strong or weak messages as in Studies
1A–2B. Participants in Study 5B received either three strong or
three weak arguments supporting the building of nuclear power
plants in Canada. For example, one strong argument stated that
nuclear power was safe because highway transport waste containers can withstand a 30-ft drop and 30-min 1,475 °F fire. In the
weak argument conditions, participants read that the highway
transport containers can withstand a 3-ft drop from a truck bed, as
well as a 3-min 375 °F fire (see Blankenship, 2006).

Dependent Variables
Attitudes. After the speech interpretation task, participants in
Study 5A were asked to rate their overall attitude toward Tashkentistan becoming a member of the EU using the same scales as
in Studies 1–3. The Cronbach’s alpha for the six items was .88.
Participants in Study 5B were asked to rate their attitude toward
the building of nuclear power plants in Canada using the same
stems as for the previous studies, but replacing “Tashkentistan
becoming a member of the EU” with “building nuclear power
plants in Canada.” The Cronbach’s alpha for the six items was .91.
Issue involvement. Following the attitude measures, participants were asked to rate how involved they were with the message
topic using four items. For Study 5A, participants were asked
“How personally involved do you feel with the issue of Tashkentistan entering the EU?” (1 ⫽ not at all involved, 9 ⫽ very
involved). Consistent with issue importance being a key feature of
issue involvement (Petty & Cacioppo, 1990), participants were
also asked “How important is the issue of whether Tashkentistan
becomes a member of the EU?” (1 ⫽ not at all important, 9 ⫽ very
important) and “To what extent should other people feel the issue
of Tashkentistan becoming a member of the EU is important?”
(1 ⫽ not at all important, 9 ⫽ very important). Finally, participants were asked “To what extent do you think the issue of

whether Tashkentistan becomes a member of the EU warrants
consideration?” (1 ⫽ not at all, 9 ⫽ very much). The Cronbach’s
alpha for the four items was .78. For Study 5B, the same items
were used, but the topic was changed to the building of nuclear
power plants in Canada. The Cronbach’s alpha for the four items
was .85.

Results
Attitudes
For both studies, the attitude measure was submitted to a 2
(value: important vs. unimportant) ⫻ 2 (argument quality: strong
vs. weak) ANOVA. The predicted Value ⫻ Argument Quality
interaction was significant for Study 5A, F(1, 257) ⫽ 11.58, p ⫽
.002, and Study 5B, F(1, 120) ⫽ 6.01, p ⫽ .017 (see Table 3). That
is, the difference between the strong and weak argument conditions was greater when values were important rather than unimportant. Thus, these studies provide replications of value importance effects on amount of processing of the message. In Study 5A,
there was also an overall main effect of argument quality, F(1,
257) ⫽ 16.65, p ⬍ .001, with strong arguments (M ⫽ 6.83, SD ⫽
1.16) leading to more favorable attitudes than weak arguments
(M ⫽ 6.21, SD ⫽ 1.30).9

Issue Involvement
A 2 (value: important vs. unimportant) ⫻ 2 (argument quality:
strong vs. weak) ANOVA revealed the expected main effect of
value in Study 5A, F(1, 257) ⫽ 9.39, p ⫽ .002, and Study 5B, F(1,
120) ⫽ 5.12, p ⫽ .025. Participants reported that they were more
involved with the issue of whether Tashkentistan should be admitted to the EU when they had previously considered values that
were important (M ⫽ 4.54, SD ⫽ 1.27) rather than unimportant
(M ⫽ 4.07, SD ⫽ 1.19). Similarly, participants reported greater
involvement with the issue of whether more nuclear power plants
should be built in Canada when they had previously considered
values that were important (M ⫽ 7.22, SD ⫽ 1.48) rather than
unimportant (M ⫽ 6.49, SD ⫽ 2.06). No other effects were
significant in either study (Fs ⬍ 1.00). This pattern of effects
makes issue involvement a potential mediator of value importance
effects on amount of processing. As noted earlier, past manipulations of issue involvement have relied on manipulations of personal relevance. Participants were asked to report how personally
relevant each topic was to them, but the value manipulation had no
influence on these perceptions (Fs ⬍ 1.20).10
9

Participants also completed thought listings. Similar to the attitude
results, there was a greater difference in thought favorability between
strong and weak arguments when values were important rather than unimportant, Value ⫻ Argument Quality interaction, F(1, 257) ⫽ 18.37, p ⬍
.001, for Study 5A, and F(1, 120) ⫽ 11.93, p ⬍ .001, for Study 5B. Also,
as in previous studies, Value ⫻ Argument Quality effects on attitudes were
mediated by Value ⫻ Thoughts effects (i.e., mediated moderation).
10
Ratings of issue importance (a core part of issue involvement) might
seem to reflect participant attitudes (i.e., the issue is important if I support
it, but unimportant if I oppose it). However, the correlation between
involvement and attitudes is very small (in Study 5A, r ⫽ .11; in Study 5B,
r ⫽ .16). This is true for the involvement measure as a whole and for the
issue importance items in particular.

VALUES, INFORMATION PROCESSING, AND RESISTANCE

Table 3
Means, Standard Deviations, and Simple Effects for Attitudes as
a Function of Value Importance and Argument Quality in
Studies 5A and 5B
Argument quality
Study
5A
Attitudes

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

5B
Attitudes

Values

Strong

Weak

t

Important
Unimportant

7.06 (1.17)
6.61 (1.11)

5.94 (1.36)
6.51 (1.16)

5.07*
0.51

Important
Unimportant

6.69 (1.20)
6.16 (1.59)

6.05 (1.33)
6.46 (1.46)

2.93*
⫺0.76

Note. Standard deviations are in parentheses.
p ⬍.05.

*

Mediational Analyses
If issue involvement is responsible for value effects on elaboration, then controlling for Issue Involvement ⫻ Argument Quality
effects should diminish the impact of Value ⫻ Argument Quality
effects on attitudes. In other words, issue involvement should
mediate the moderation of argument quality effects by value
importance (cf. Muller et al., 2005; Wegener & Fabrigar, 2000). If
issue involvement mediates the moderational effects of value
importance, this would be the first evidence that value importance
influences amount of processing through perceptions of issue
involvement.
As reported earlier, the Value ⫻ Argument Quality interaction
significantly predicted participants’ attitudes, Study 5A, b ⫽ 0.26,
t(257) ⫽ 3.40, p ⬍ .001; Study 5B, b ⫽ 0.31, t(120) ⫽ 2.45, p ⫽
.017. Also as presented earlier, we obtained significant value main
effects on issue involvement, Study 5A, b ⫽ 0.47, t(257) ⫽ 3.05,
p ⫽ .002; Study 5B, b ⫽ 0.37, t(120) ⫽ 2.27, p ⬍ .025. When
involvement, argument quality, and their interaction were used to
predict attitudes, the Involvement ⫻ Argument Quality interaction
was significant, Study 5A, b ⫽ 0.29, t(255) ⫽ 4.98, p ⬍ .001;
Study 5B, b ⫽ 0.26, t(118) ⫽ 2.76, p ⫽ .01. Finally, when effects
of the proposed mediator were added to the distal predictors of
attitudes, the Issue Involvement ⫻ Argument Quality interaction
remained significant, Study 5A, b ⫽ 0.25, t(255) ⫽ 4.16, p ⬍ .001;
Study 5B, b ⫽ 0.22, t(118) ⫽ 2.01, p ⫽ .048, whereas the distal
Value ⫻ Argument Quality interaction was reduced, though still
significant or marginal, Study 5A, b ⫽ 0.19, t(255) ⫽ 2.60, p ⫽
.01; Study 5B, b ⫽ 0.13, t(118) ⫽ 1.78, p ⫽ .08.11 As noted
earlier, the combination of the two significant paths (a direct effect
of the distal variable on the mediator and moderation involving
that mediator on the back end, when controlling for the distal
moderation) supports the mediated moderation pattern (Muller et
al., 2005; Wegener & Fabrigar, 2000).12

Discussion
Studies 5A and 5B replicated previous effects of value importance increasing processing of a related persuasive message using
two different message topics. More importantly, the studies also
provided evidence for the proposed mechanism behind value importance effects on elaboration of the message. That is, consider-

209

ation of important values increased the extent to which participants
became personally involved in the topic, and this involvement
motivated them to elaborate on message content. These results are
important for the current setting because they connect the results to
the extensive literature on issue involvement and message processing. They are also important for the issue involvement literature
because they provide the first evidence for increased involvement
when people consider a topic in general as related to cherished
values. Although past discussions of issue involvement have noted
that people can become involved with a topic for many reasons
(e.g., because the topic addresses cherished people, outcomes,
values, or possessions), most past research manipulating issue
involvement has focused on personal relevance (e.g., Petty &
Cacioppo, 1979; Petty et al., 1981). The current research shows
that involvement can be increased by consideration of important
values, even in a setting where the values have no effect on
perceptions of personal relevance and the resulting attitudes are
not viewed as based on the values.

General Discussion
Values have long been considered important in creating strong
attitudes that are resistant to change and that influence behavior
(see Allport, 1961; Rokeach, 1968, 1973). Past discussions of
value effects on attitude strength have focused on the benefits of
11

Using thoughts as a dependent variable produced similar mediated
moderation results. The Value ⫻ Argument Quality interaction significantly predicted thought favorability, Study 5A, b ⫽ 0.13, t(257) ⫽ 4.29,
p ⬍ .001; Study 5B, b ⫽ 0.15, t(120) ⫽ 3.45, p ⫽ .002. When involvement,
argument quality, and their interaction were used to predict thoughts, there
was a significant Involvement ⫻ Argument Quality interaction, Study 5A,
b ⫽ 0.09, t(257) ⫽ 3.49, p ⫽ .001; Study 5B, b ⫽ 0.16, t(120) ⫽ 4.74, p ⬍
.001. When including the effects of all distal predictors plus the involvement main effect and Involvement ⫻ Argument Quality interaction, the
Issue Involvement ⫻ Argument Quality interaction remained strong and
significant, Study 5A, b ⫽ 0.07, t(255) ⫽ 2.81, p ⫽ .005; Study 5B, b ⫽
0.13, t(118) ⫽ 3.07, p ⫽ .003, whereas the distal Value ⫻ Argument
Quality interaction was reduced, Study 5A, b ⫽ 0.05, t(255) ⫽ 0.81, p ⫽
.28; Study 5B, b ⫽ 0.05, t(118) ⫽ 1.77, p ⫽ .08. The more complete chain
of effects may be that value importance influences issue involvement, issue
involvement interacts with argument quality to influence thoughts, and
issue involvement also interacts with thought favorability to influence
attitudes. The mediated moderation with issue involvement mediating
effects of value importance on thoughts is presented in this note, and Issue
Involvement ⫻ Thought Favorability effects also mediated Issue Involvement ⫻ Argument Quality effects on attitudes in Studies 5A and 5B.
12
Our analyses treated thoughts as mediators of argument quality effects
on attitudes. Of course, thoughts could also have been generated to justify
recently reported attitudes, despite instructions to report thoughts that came
to mind when receiving the message. If so, perhaps one would treat
attitudes as a mediator of argument quality effects on thoughts. This would
not necessarily conflict with treating attitudes as more thoughtful when
argument quality effects occur than when they do not, but the causal chain
would look a bit different. In two of the six studies where thought
mediation of argument quality effects was presented, either mediational
path is empirically plausible (i.e., Studies 1B and 4). However, in the other
four studies (i.e., Studies 1A, 2B, 5A, and 5B), attitudes do not serve as
statistical mediators of argument quality effects on thoughts, but thoughts
do mediate argument quality effects on attitudes. Thus, the general pattern
is consistent with the presented analyses.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

210

BLANKENSHIP AND WEGENER

creating direct, explicit links between values and attitudes (often
attempting to make the attitudes value expressive; e.g., Kristiansen
& Zanna, 1988; Maio & Olson, 1995; cf. Nelson, 1968; Ostrom &
Brock, 1969). Because values come with extensive cognitive structures, attaching an attitude to that structure should impart strength
to the attitude (Eagly & Chaiken, 1993, 1998; Scott, 1969). This
approach makes sense, and we do not disagree with it. However,
the current research, as well as research by Maio, Olson, and
colleagues, suggests that this idea may require some caveats. For
example, Maio and Olson (1998) suggested that at least some
values may not be associated with extensive cognitive structures.
Instead, the values act as truisms, in that the values are easily
changed when challenged, presumably because the values are
rarely questioned or defended (McGuire, 1964; see also Bernard,
Maio, & Olson, 2003). Truistic values may not have the kinds of
structure-based effects previously described in the literature.
The current research suggests that there may also be less direct
effects of values on attitude strength. Consideration of a topic in
relation to important values might increase perceptions that the
topic itself is important (and, therefore, increase the level of the
person’s involvement with the issue). Involvement with the issue
can then increase processing of material presented along with
those values. If so, then even if the resulting attitudes do not come
to represent or express the values themselves (i.e., even if the
cognitive structures are not strongly connected), the processing
prompted by the values can increase attitude strength (in the
current case, resulting in greater resistance to change). The current
article reports evidence consistent with each of these mediational
steps.
When important values prompt processing, the ultimate result
might sometimes be to create direct connections between the
values and the attitudes, but it need not be. In the current
setting, because the arguments themselves were not phrased
such that the values formed the basis for the argument, it may
have been less likely for the attitudes to be viewed as representing or expressing the values. Nonetheless, because information processing was extensive when important values were
considered, the consideration of important values still created
attitudes that were strong. It remains to be seen whether a
truistic value is sufficient for creating the current motivating
effects of value consideration or whether these effects are most
likely with values associated with extensive knowledge structures. If a mere perception of value importance is the key, then
even truistic values may produce the current influences of value
importance on elaboration of associated messages. This would
be an interesting question for future research.
The current work also shows that attitudes more successfully
resist change in the face of attack when important rather than
unimportant values have been considered with the initial message. For the first time, direct mediational analyses showed that
the value effects on resistance were mediated by differing
amounts of message processing. Thus, at least in the current
paradigm, value effects on resistance can be produced indirectly
through value effects on amount of processing. Some past
research intended to anchor beliefs to values has also suggested
that elaboration might be important (e.g., Nelson, 1968). Therefore, it seems reasonable to ask whether value effects on elaboration of the associated message constitute a large part of
value effects on resistance, even when persuasive materials

create attitudes that are identified as representing or expressing
core values (cf. Holbrook et al., 2005). Because no structurebased value effects on resistance to change have been demonstrated separate from value effects on message processing, it is
possible that the current indirect effects are, in fact, the primary
reasons for value effects on attitude resistance. It is also quite
possible, however, that both types of effects occur under certain
circumstances. We can imagine a variety of possible moderators, including whether support or opposition of the values
themselves form core parts of the message arguments. We
would note, however, that such moderational questions primarily become important when each process has been unambiguously demonstrated in the literature.
Message processing effects may also take on different forms
when attitudes are viewed as expressing cherished values. In such
settings, a persuasive message might be viewed as supporting the
value (if the message is proattitudinal) or opposing the value (if the
message is counterattitudinal). If the message is viewed as opposing the value, it could be that people are motivated to reject the
message or that they attempt to avoid the message altogether (e.g.,
Maio & Olson, 1995). We look forward to future research addressing potential moderators of the current processing effects of value
importance and of the role of processing in resistance when attitudes are explicitly value relevant.

Potential Limitations
The current research used what might seem on the face of it to
be a rather artificial setting for value consideration. We chose to
use an adaptation of the Ostrom and Brock (1968, 1969) procedure
because the procedure represents (a) the primary experimental
method previously used to demonstrate effects of values on attitude resistance and (b) a situation in which our alternative route
from values 3 processing 3 attitude resistance seemed likely to
occur, without necessarily going through value-expressive (valuerelevant) attitude properties. It is important to note, however, that
the current processing effects are not limited to the current paradigm. We have replicated these processing patterns using alternative methods, such as asking people to write about the relation
between the value and the information in the message (cf. Nelson,
1968).
Blankenship (2006) also presented data showing the same processing effects and involvement-based mediation (using the nuclear power topic from the current Study 5B) when the values were
simply presented for 1.5 s prior to the message, with no explicit
instructions to consider the values in relation to the message.
Participants were told that the research addressed aids to reading
comprehension, but there was no speech interpretation task, and
participants did not have to do anything with the values to complete the experimental tasks. Clearly, then, the effects of value
importance on processing are not limited to situations where
participants have to draw links between values and words in a
persuasive message.
Future research could also address more microlevels, such as
how the importance of the value influences perceptions of issue
involvement. Previous discussions of issue involvement have simply noted that people become more involved if they perceive the
topic as related to important values. But there may be a number of
ways that values could influence message recipients’ level of

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

VALUES, INFORMATION PROCESSING, AND RESISTANCE

involvement, and these different mechanisms could open up new
effects of value consideration. For example, the important value
might simply be activated (primed) by the value consideration
task. If so, then message recipients might become more involved
with any topic ambiguously related to the value (because of its
potential relation to the value). Yet these effects might still require
a potential relation between the topic and the value in the mind of
perceivers.
Other even broader possibilities also exist. It could be, for
example, that important values activate the concept of importance. If so, it could also be that important objects, people, or
attitudes might have similar effects. This would suggest that
perceived relations between the value and message topic might
not be necessary. However, it could be necessary for the activated concept to be broad and applicable to the topic at hand (as
a value would often be). When more narrow (specific) or
inapplicable concepts are activated, their importance might set
up a standard against which the perceived importance of the
current message topic is compared (cf. Tormala & Petty, 2007).
Of course, if this were to occur, the result could be assimilation
toward or contrast away from the importance of the activated
construct, depending on how similar the importance levels of
the standard and the message topic might be (e.g., Herr, 1986;
Sherif & Hovland, 1961; see Mussweiler, 2003). If these
priming-based mechanisms are operating, then one could imagine many settings to which the current results would generalize
(because values could be activated in a variety of ways, including intentional activation of values by advertisers or other
message sources) and some to which the current results would
not generalize (because contrast effects of importance would be
opposite in direction to the current effects). We look forward to
future research that examines the value importance–issue involvement (issue importance) relation in greater detail (see also
Blankenship, 2006).

Applied Implications
The current approach could be useful in many applied domains, when communicators seek to influence those who believe that a topic is utterly irrelevant to them. For example,
many youths regard health risks, such as smoking-related illness, as unlikely to affect them (Milam, Sussman, Ritt-Olson, &
Clyde, 2000). As a result, they pay little attention to messages
on the topic, and their health-related behaviors are difficult to
change. Yet the present research suggests that there may be
routes other than personal relevance to motivate message recipients to pay close attention to information. Many of the same
youths who regard ill effects of smoking (or sun exposure, or
unsafe sex, or other risky health behaviors) as unlikely to affect
them personally still hold a variety of values as important in
their lives. Thus, if the current results hold true, communicators
may be able to increase processing of these health messages by
getting the message recipients to consider the messages in
relation to important values (whether or not those values form
the crux of the message content). We look forward to testing
these implications of the current research.

211

References
Abelson, R. P. (1995). Attitude extremity. In R. E. Petty & J. A. Krosnick
(Eds.), Attitude strength: Antecedents and consequences (pp. 25– 42).
Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Aiken, L. S., & West, S. G. (1991). Multiple regression: Testing and
interpreting interactions. London: Sage.
Allport, G. W. (1961). Pattern and growth in personality. New York: Holt,
Rinehart & Winston.
Apsler, R., & Sears, D. O. (1968). Warning, personal involvement, and
attitude change. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 9, 162–
166.
Barden, J. C. (2006). A comprehensive process from antecedents of elaboration to strength consequences: Mediation by the perception of the
extent of elaboration. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Ohio State
University, Columbus.
Baron, R. M., & Kenny, D. A. (1986). The moderator–mediator variable
distinction in social psychological research: Conceptual, strategic, and
statistical considerations. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
51, 1173–1182.
Bassili, J. N. (1996). Meta-judgmental versus operative indexes of psychological attributes: The case of measures of attitude strength. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 71, 637– 653.
Bernard, M. B., Maio, G. R., & Olson, J. M. (2003). The vulnerability of
values to attack: Inoculation of values and value-relevant attitudes.
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 29, 63–75.
Blankenship, K. L. (2006). Opening the mind before it closes: Considering
a message in light of important values increases message processing and
later resistance to change. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Purdue
University, West Lafayette, IN.
Blankenship, K. L., & Wegener, D. T. (2007). [Value consideration and
processing of consumer messages]. Unpublished raw data.
Boninger, D. S., Krosnick, J. A., & Berent, M. K. (1995). The causes of
attitude importance: Self-interest, social identification, and values. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 68, 61– 80.
Cacioppo, J. T., Petty, R. E., & Morris, K. J. (1983). Effects of need for
cognition on message evaluation, recall, and persuasion. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 45, 805– 818.
Chaiken, S., Liberman, A., & Eagly, A. H. (1989). Heuristic and systematic
processing within and beyond the persuasion context. In J. S. Uleman &
J. A. Bargh (Eds.), Unintended thought (pp. 212–252). New York:
Guilford Press.
Chaiken, S., & Maheswaran, D. (1994). Heuristic processing can bias
systematic processing: Effects of source credibility, argument ambiguity, and task importance on attitude judgment. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 66, 460 – 473.
DeBono, K. G., (1987). Investigating the social adjustive and valueexpressive functions of attitudes: Implications for persuasion processes.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 52, 279–287.
Eagly, A. H., & Chaiken, S. (1993). The psychology of attitudes. Harcourt
Brace Jovanovich: Fort Worth, TX.
Eagly, A. H., & Chaiken, S. (1998). Attitude structure and function. In D.
Gilbert, S. Fiske, & G. Lindzey (Eds.), Handbook of social psychology
(4th ed., pp. 269 –322). New York: McGraw-Hill.
Erb, H., Bohner, G., Rank, S., & Einwiller, S. (2002). Processing minority
and majority communications: The role of conflict with prior attitudes.
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 28, 1172–1182.
Erb, H., Bohner, G., Schalzle, K., & Rank, S. (1998). Beyond conflict and
discrepancy: Cognitive bias in minority and majority influence. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 24, 620 – 633.
Haugtvedt, C. P., & Petty, R. E. (1992). Personality and persuasion: Need
for cognition moderates persistence and resistance of attitude changes.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 63, 308 –319.
Haugtvedt, C. P., & Wegener, D. T. (1994). Message order effects in

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

212

BLANKENSHIP AND WEGENER

persuasion: An attitude strength perspective. Journal of Consumer Research, 21, 205–218.
Herr, P. M. (1986). Consequences of priming: Judgment and behavior.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 51, 1106 –1115.
Holbrook, A. L., Berent, M. K., Krosnick, J. A., Visser, P. S., & Boninger,
D. S. (2005). Attitude importance and the accumulation of attituderelevant knowledge in memory. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 88, 749 –769.
Johnson, B. T., & Eagly, A. H. (1989). The effects of involvement on
persuasion: A meta-analysis. Psychological Bulletin, 106, 290 –314.
Katz, D. (1960). The functional approach to the study of attitudes. Public
Opinion Quarterly, 24, 163–204.
Kiesler, C. A., Collins, B. E., & Miller, N. (1969). Attitude change: A
critical analysis of theoretical approaches. New York: Wiley.
Kraus, S. J. (1995). Attitudes and the prediction of behavior: A metaanalysis of the empirical literature. Personality and Social Psychology
Bulletin, 21, 58 –75.
Kristiansen, C. M., & Zanna, M. P. (1988). Justifying attitudes by appealing to values: A functional perspective. British Journal of Social Psychology, 27, 247–256.
Krosnick, J. A., & Petty, R. E. (1995). Attitude strength: An overview. In
R. E. Petty & J. A. Krosnick (Eds.), Attitude strength: Antecedents and
consequences (pp. 1–24). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Lydon, J. E., & Zanna, M. P. (1990). Commitment in the face of adversity:
A value-affirmation approach. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 58, 1040 –1057.
Maio, G. R., & Olson, J. M. (1995). Involvement and persuasion: Evidence
for different types of involvement. Canadian Journal of Behavioural
Science, 27, 64 –78.
Maio, G. R., & Olson, J. M. (1998). Values as truisms: Evidence and
implications. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 74, 294 –
311.
Maio, G. R., & Olson, J. M. (2000). What is a “value-expressive” attitude?
In G. R. Maio & J. M. Olson (Eds.), Why we evaluate: Functions of
attitudes (pp. 249 –270). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
McGuire, W. J. (1964). Inducing resistance to persuasion: Some contemporary approaches. In L. Berkowitz (Ed.), Advances in experimental
social psychology (Vol. 1, pp. 191–229). San Diego, CA: Academic
Press.
Milam, J. E., Sussman, S. Ritt-Olson, A. D., & Clyde, W. (2000). Perceived invulnerability and cigarette smoking among adolescents. Addictive Behaviors, 25, 71– 80.
Muller, D., Judd, C. M., & Yzerbyt, V. Y. (2005). When moderation is
mediated and mediation is moderated. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 89, 852– 863.
Murray, S. L., Haddock, G., & Zanna, M. P. (1996). On creating valueexpressive attitudes: An experimental approach. In C. Seligman, J. M.
Olson, & M. P. Zanna (Eds.), The psychology of values: The Ontario
Symposium (Vol. 8, pp. 107–133). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Mussweiler, T. (2003). Comparison processes in social judgment: Mechanisms and consequences. Psychological Review, 110, 472– 489.
Nelson, C. E. (1968). Anchoring to accepted values as a technique for
immunizing beliefs against persuasion. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 9, 329 –334.
Ostrom, T. M., & Brock, T. C. (1968). A cognitive model of attitudinal
involvement. In R. P. Abelson, E. Aronson, W. J. McGuire, T. M.
Newcomb, M. J. Rosenberg, & P. H. Tannenbaum (Eds.), Theories of
cognitive consistency: A sourcebook (pp. 373–383). Chicago: Rand
McNally.
Ostrom, T. M., & Brock, T. C. (1969). Cognitive bonding to central values
and resistance to a communication advocating change in policy orientation. Journal of Experimental Research in Personality, 4, 42–50.
Petty, R. E., Briñol, P., & Tormala, Z. L. (2002). Thought confidence as a

determinant of persuasion: The self-validation hypothesis. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 82, 722–741.
Petty, R. E., & Cacioppo, J. T. (1979). Issue involvement can increase or
decrease persuasion by enhancing message-relevant cognitive responses.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 37, 1915–1926.
Petty, R. E., & Cacioppo, J. T. (1986). Communication and persuasion:
Central and peripheral routes to attitude change. New York: SpringerVerlag.
Petty, R. E., & Cacioppo, J. T. (1990). Involvement and persuasion:
Tradition versus integration. Psychological Bulletin, 107, 367–374.
Petty, R. E., Cacioppo, J. T., & Goldman, R. (1981). Personal involvement
as a determinant of argument-based persuasion. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 41, 847– 855.
Petty, R. E., Haugtvedt, C. P., & Smith, S. M. (1995). Elaboration as a
determinant of attitude strength. In R. E. Petty & J. A. Krosnick (Eds.),
Attitude strength: Antecedents and consequences (pp. 93–130). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Petty, R. E., & Krosnick, J. A. (Eds.). (1995). Attitude strength: Antecedents and consequences. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Petty, R. E., & Wegener, D. T. (1998). Attitude change: Multiple roles for
persuasion variables. In D. Gilbert, S. Fiske, & G. Lindzey (Eds.),
Handbook of social psychology (4th ed., pp. 323–390). New York:
McGraw-Hill.
Petty, R. E., Wells, G. L., & Brock, T. C. (1976). Distraction can enhance
or reduce yielding to propaganda: Thought disruption versus effort
justification. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 34, 874 –
884.
Rohan, M. J. (2000). A rose by any name? The values construct. Personality and Social Psychology Review, 3, 255–277.
Rokeach, M. (1968). Beliefs, attitudes, and values: A theory of organization and change. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Rokeach, M. (1973). The nature of human values. New York: Free Press.
Schwartz, S. H. (1992). Universals in the content and structure of values:
Theoretical advances and empirical tests in 20 countries. In M. P. Zanna
(Ed.), Advances in experimental social psychology (Vol. 24, pp. 1– 65).
San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Schwartz, S. H., & Bilsky, W. (1987). Toward a psychological structure of
human values. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 53, 550 –
562.
Schwartz, S. H., & Bilsky, W. (1990). Toward a psychological structure of
human values: Extensions and cross-cultural replications. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 58, 878 – 891.
Scott, J. (1969). Structure of natural cognitions. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 12, 261–278.
Sherif, M., & Cantril, H. (1947). The psychology of ego-involvements,
social attitudes and identifications. New York: Wiley.
Sherif, M., & Hovland, C. I. (1961). Social judgment: Assimilation and
contract effects in communication and attitude change. New Haven, CT:
Yale University Press.
Thomsen, C. J., Lavine, H., & Kounios, J. (1996). Social value and attitude
concepts in semantic memory: Relational structure, concept strength,
and the fan effect. Social Cognition, 14, 191–225.
Tormala, Z. L., & Petty, R. E. (2002). What doesn’t kill me makes me
stronger: The effects of resisting persuasion on attitude certainty. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 83, 1298 –1307.
Tormala, Z. L., & Petty, R. E. (2007). Contextual contrast and perceived
knowledge: Exploring the implications for persuasion. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 43, 17–30.
Vaughn, G. M., & Mangan, G. L. (1963). Conformity to group pressure in
relation to the value of the task material. Journal of Abnormal and Social
Psychology, 66, 179 –183.
Wegener, D. T., Downing, J., Krosnick, J. A., & Petty, R. E. (1995).
Strength-related properties of attitudes: Measures, manipulations, and
future directions. In R. E. Petty & J. A. Krosnick (Eds.), Attitude

VALUES, INFORMATION PROCESSING, AND RESISTANCE

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

strength: Antecedents and consequences (pp. 455– 487). Mahwah, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Wegener, D. T., & Fabrigar, L. R. (2000). Analysis and design for nonexperimental data: Addressing causal and noncausal hypotheses. In H. T.
Reis & C. M. Judd (Eds.), Handbook of research methods in social and
personality psychology (pp. 412– 450). Cambridge, England: Cambridge
University Press.
Wegener, D. T., & Fabrigar, L. R. (2004). Constructing and evaluating
quantitative measures for social psychological research: Conceptual
challenges and methodological solutions. In C. Sansone, C. C. Morf, &
A. T. Painter (Eds.), The Sage handbook of methods in social psychology
(pp. 145–172). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.

213

Wegener, D. T., Petty, R. E., Smoak, N. L., & Fabrigar, L. R., (2004).
Multiple routes to resisting attitude change. In E. S. Knowles & J. A.
Linn (Eds.), Resistance and persuasion (pp. 1–24). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Woodruff, A. D., & Divesta, F. J. (1948). The relationship between values,
concepts, and attitudes. Educational and Psychological Measurement, 8,
645– 659.

Received October 18, 2006
Revision received August 20, 2007
Accepted August 22, 2007 䡲

New Editors Appointed, 2009 –2014
The Publications and Communications Board of the American Psychological Association announces the appointment of six new editors for 6-year terms beginning in 2009. As of January 1,
2008, manuscripts should be directed as follows:
● Journal of Applied Psychology (http://www.apa.org/journals/apl), Steve W. J. Kozlowski,
PhD, Department of Psychology, Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI 48824.
● Journal of Educational Psychology (http://www.apa.org/journals/edu), Arthur C. Graesser,
PhD, Department of Psychology, University of Memphis, 202 Psychology Building, Memphis,
TN 38152.
● Journal of Personality and Social Psychology: Interpersonal Relations and Group Processes
(http://www.apa.org/journals/psp), Jeffry A. Simpson, PhD, Department of Psychology,
University of Minnesota, 75 East River Road, N394 Elliott Hall, Minneapolis, MN 55455.
● Psychology of Addictive Behaviors (http://www.apa.org/journals/adb), Stephen A. Maisto,
PhD, Department of Psychology, Syracuse University, Syracuse, NY 13244.
● Behavioral Neuroscience (http://www.apa.org/journals/bne), Mark S. Blumberg, PhD, Department of Psychology, University of Iowa, E11 Seashore Hall, Iowa City, IA 52242.
● Psychological Bulletin (http://www.apa.org/journals/bul), Stephen P. Hinshaw, PhD, Department of Psychology, University of California, Tolman Hall #1650, Berkeley, CA 94720.
(Manuscripts will not be directed to Dr. Hinshaw until July 1, 2008, as Harris Cooper will
continue as editor until June 30, 2008.)
Electronic manuscript submission: As of January 1, 2008, manuscripts should be submitted
electronically via the journal’s Manuscript Submission Portal (see the website listed above with
each journal title).
Manuscript submission patterns make the precise date of completion of the 2008 volumes
uncertain. Current editors, Sheldon Zedeck, PhD, Karen R. Harris, EdD, John F. Dovidio, PhD,
Howard J. Shaffer, PhD, and John F. Disterhoft, PhD, will receive and consider manuscripts through
December 31, 2007. Harris Cooper, PhD, will continue to receive manuscripts until June 30, 2008.
Should 2008 volumes be completed before that date, manuscripts will be redirected to the new
editors for consideration in 2009 volumes.

