Journal of Personality and Social Psychology
2008, Vol. 94, No. 5, 871– 882

Copyright 2008 by the American Psychological Association
0022-3514/08/$12.00 DOI: 10.1037/0022-3514.94.5.871

Distinguishing Between Silent and Vocal Minorities: Not All Deviants Feel
Marginal
Kimberly Rios Morrison and Dale T. Miller

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Stanford University
People’s opinions can deviate from that of the average group member in two ways. Descriptive deviants
diverge from the average group attitude in a direction consistent with the desirable group attitude;
prescriptive deviants diverge from the average group attitude in a direction inconsistent with the desirable
group attitude. Three studies tested the hypothesis that descriptive deviants are more willing to express
their opinions than either nondeviants or prescriptive deviants. Study 1 found that college students
reported more comfort in expressing descriptive deviant opinions because descriptive deviance induced
feelings of superior conformity (i.e., being “different but good”). Study 2 found that descriptive deviants
reported more pride after expressing their opinions, were rated as more proud by an observer, and were
more willing to publicize their opinions. Study 3 showed that political bumper stickers with descriptive
deviant messages were displayed disproportionately more frequently than were those with prescriptive
deviant messages.
Keywords: minorities, deviance, social norms

nam War, U.S. Vice President Spiro Agnew famously claimed that
the highly visible anti-war protesters constituted a mere “vocal
minority” who were out of step with the larger, more representative “silent majority” (Noelle-Neumann, 1984).
Noelle-Neumann may be correct that some minority sentiments
are more likely to be publicized than others, but how can we
predict which minorities will voice their opinions and which will
become trapped in a “spiral of silence”? To begin to answer this
question, we distinguish between two features of deviant opinions:
the magnitude of deviance from the average group opinion and the
direction of this deviance. We then explain why these features
might influence patterns of opinion expression.
In this article, the terms minority and deviant neither carry
negative connotations nor imply that a person so characterized
necessarily perceives him- or herself as dissimilar from the rest of
the group. These terms simply refer to individuals whose attitudes
are objectively (i.e., statistically) different from those of most other
group members (Blanton & Christie, 2003).

Those holding minority opinions have good reason to keep
silent. Expressing opinions that differ from those of the majority
can expose individuals to a number of forms of social punishment,
including exclusion and persecution (Kuran, 1995; Levine, 1989;
Marques & Paez, 1994). Recognizing this fact, minorities predictably report feeling more uncomfortable, anxious, awkward, frustrated, and unhappy in group settings than do their majority counterparts (Matz & Wood, 2005; Nemeth & Wachtler, 1983). The
best advice for someone who holds a minority opinion and wishes
to avoid trouble would thus seem clear: If you aren’t prepared to
modify your opinion in the direction of the majority, at least keep
silent. Indeed, evidence suggests that people holding minority
opinions take more time to express their opinions (Bassili, 2003),
when they do not avoid expressing them altogether (NoelleNeumann, 1984).
Not all minorities are silent, however. In her book The Spiral of
Silence, Elisabeth Noelle-Neumann (1984) asserts that even when
supporters of different minority viewpoints are equal in numbers,
they may differ in their reluctance to make their sentiments known.
Indeed, minorities can be at least as vocal as majorities under
certain circumstances. For example, during the height of the Viet-

Deviance: Magnitude Versus Direction
Most research on opinion expression has treated minority/
majority status as a dichotomous variable and has shown that
group members who either hold or are randomly assigned to argue
in favor of a minority opinion are less willing to speak out than
those who are in the majority (Asch, 1956; Bassili, 2003; Matz &
Wood, 2005). A smaller number of studies have allowed for the
possibility that opinion deviance can vary within a group. These
studies have generally found that the likelihood that a person will
publicize an opinion depends on the actual or perceived distance of
that opinion from the average group opinion. The greater that
distance, the more unwilling group members are to voice their
opinions (Glynn, Hayes, & Shanahan, 1997).
The magnitude of distance from the average group opinion is
not the only, nor possibly even the most important, determinant of

Kimberly Rios Morrison and Dale T. Miller, Graduate School of Business, Stanford University.
We would like to thank Evan Morrison, Lara Tiedens, Christian
Wheeler, Debbie Prentice, Penny Visser, members of the 2004 –2005
Workshop in Behavioral Research, and members of the 2005–2006 Miller
Lab for their helpful feedback on earlier versions of this article. We also
acknowledge Becky Schaumberg, David Campos, Stephanie Lam, Kyle
Peterson, and Valerie Rios for their assistance with data collection and
coding.
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Kimberly
Rios Morrison, Graduate School of Business, Stanford University, 518
Memorial Way, Stanford, CA 94305. E-mail: krios@stanford.edu or
dtmiller@stanford.edu
871

MORRISON AND MILLER

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

872

the likelihood that a particular opinion will be expressed. We
propose that the direction in which an opinion deviates from the
group average is also a critical determinant of whether its holder
will be vocal or silent. Conceptualizing deviance in terms of both
direction and magnitude recognizes that groups can be viewed as
often having two norms with respect to many attitudes and behaviors (see Cialdini, Reno, & Kallgren, 1990; Cialdini & Trost, 1998;
Prentice & Miller, 1996). The first norm reflects the common
attitudes or behaviors of the group—that is, what group members
actually think or do (i.e., the descriptive norm). The second norm
reflects the desirable attitudes or behaviors of the group—that is,
what group members believe they should or ought to think or do
(i.e., the prescriptive norm). To adequately describe the deviance
of a position, then, one needs to know the relation of that position
to both the descriptive and prescriptive group norms.
In referring to the average group attitude as the descriptive
norm, we are assuming—and we conducted a pretest to confirm—
that the distribution of group attitudes is unimodal. Were a bimodal
distribution to exist, there would be two descriptive norms (i.e.,
two different groups) in the population. Furthermore, the average
attitude of the population would actually represent a minority
opinion within either of these two groups (see Levine & Ranelli,
1978). Supporting our assumption, people generally tend to perceive social distributions (e.g., of group members’ attitudes and
behaviors) as normal rather than bimodal (Nisbett & Kunda,
1985), except when the group under question is unfamiliar to them
(but see Judd & Johnson, 1981).

Descriptive and Prescriptive Deviance
When the descriptive norm (average attitude) and prescriptive
norm (desirable attitude) of the group diverge, one can actually
speak of two overlapping categories of deviants—those who deviate from the descriptive norm in a direction consistent with the
prescriptive norm and those who deviate from the descriptive norm
in a direction inconsistent with the prescriptive norm. We call the
former category of individuals descriptive deviants, given their
divergence from the descriptive (but not prescriptive) norm. Conversely, we call the latter category of individuals prescriptive
deviants, given their divergence from both the prescriptive norm
and the descriptive norm.
As an example of descriptive and prescriptive deviance, consider a college campus in which the descriptive norm for political
attitudes is slightly liberal. Assuming that the prescriptive norm is
also liberal, extremely liberal students would be descriptive deviants, and extremely conservative students would be prescriptive
deviants. In this example, although both descriptive and prescriptive deviants hold positions that differ from that of the average
group member, only the position of prescriptive deviants undermines the prescriptive group norm. The position of descriptive
deviants, more than that of even nondeviants, reinforces the prescriptive group norm.
Our typology of deviance bears a similarity to that proposed by
Abrams, Marques, Bown, and Henson (2000). Abrams and colleagues distinguished between pronorm deviants, whose values
deviate from the group in the direction of the group prototype (i.e.,
desirable group attitude), and antinorm deviants, whose values
deviate from the group in the direction away from the group
prototype. According to their model, pronorm deviants validate the

ingroup’s norms, and hence function to differentiate the ingroup
from other groups, to a greater extent than do antinorm deviants.
One consequence of this, demonstrated by Abrams and colleagues,
is that pronorm deviants are rated as more prototypical and are
evaluated more positively than antinorm deviants and, in some
cases, normatives (i.e., nondeviant group members; Abrams et al.,
2000; see also Abrams, de Moura, Hutchison, & Viki, 2005;
Abrams, Marques, Bown, & Dougill, 2002).
Despite these similarities, the present model departs from that of
Abrams and colleagues in two ways. First, whereas Abrams and
colleagues emphasize intergroup differences (those between the
ingroup and outgroups), we emphasize intragroup differences
(those between ingroup members). For example, Abrams and
colleagues define descriptive norms as characteristics of the ingroup that distinguish it from relevant outgroups (e.g., members of
one sports team wear a certain color jersey in part to avoid being
mistaken for the opposing team; Abrams et al., 2000). By contrast,
we define descriptive norms as characteristics of most ingroup
members that distinguish ingroup nondeviants from ingroup deviants (e.g., most sports fans at a game might wear a single item of
clothing in their team’s color, whereas other fans might wear more
or fewer items of clothing in that color). Additionally, although
both models suggest that those who deviate from group norms in
a desirable direction will voice their opinions more readily than
those who deviate from group norms in an undesirable direction or
(in many cases) those who do not deviate at all, the reason
specified by each model is different. Abrams and colleagues would
claim that people adopt and express certain (i.e., pronorm) deviant
opinions in order to differentiate their own group from other
groups. Our model focuses on how people adopt and express
certain (i.e., descriptive) deviant opinions in order to maintain a
positive individual identity relative to other ingroup members.

Implications for Opinion Expression
We argue that the direction of difference from the group average
is critical in determining how comfortable a person with a deviant
opinion will feel expressing that opinion. Specifically, descriptive
deviants will be more comfortable and willing to express their
opinions than both nondeviants and prescriptive deviants. As noted
earlier, previous research on opinion expression has generally
classified group members into one of two categories: majority or
minority (Asch, 1956; Matz & Wood, 2005). One demonstration of
the link between minority status and opinion expression is Bassili’s (2003) finding that minority opinion holders were slower to
report their attitudes in a telephone survey than were majority
opinion holders, even after several different measures of attitude
strength (e.g., certainty, importance, extremity; see also Krosnick,
Boninger, Chuang, Berent, & Carnot, 1993) were controlled. Bassili’s proposed explanation for these results was that holding a
minority opinion induces internal conflict in individuals, which in
turn leads to slower response latencies (Bassili, 2003; see also
Bassili, 1995; Huckfeldt & Sprague, 2000).
When group members’ opinions have instead been represented
on a continuum, the predominant assumption is that the more one’s
opinion differs from that of the group average (in any direction),
the more reluctant he or she will be to express that opinion (Bassili,
2003; Glynn et al., 1997). For instance, Bassili (2003) found the
“minority slowness effect” (p. 261) to be especially pronounced in

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

SILENT AND VOCAL MINORITIES

groups with a large majority and among group members who
perceived the size of the majority to be large. Though the relation
between deviance magnitude and opinion expression is well established, deviance direction has yet to be examined in this context. Moreover, in explaining why those who hold deviant opinions
may be unwilling to express their opinions, previous research has
focused on the factors that distinguish deviants from nondeviants,
such as perceived similarity to or anticipated liking by other group
members (Glynn et al., 1997; Hensley & Duval, 1976; Levine &
Ranelli, 1978; see also Levine, 1989). This research has suggested
that the greater the magnitude of deviance, the lower one’s perceived similarity to one’s peers (Glynn et al., 1997) and the lower
one’s chances of being well liked by one’s peers (Hensley &
Duval, 1976; Levine & Ranelli, 1978).
Given our focus on deviance direction, however, we took a
different approach by examining a factor that may distinguish
certain (i.e., descriptive) deviants from both nondeviants and other
(i.e., prescriptive) deviants. Specifically, our claim that descriptive
deviance, as opposed to prescriptive deviance or nondeviance,
increases willingness to express oneself derives from the assumption that people have competing psychological needs for similarity
and distinctiveness. As uniqueness theory postulates, individuals
are reluctant to accept feedback that they are either extremely
similar to or extremely different from their peers (Snyder &
Fromkin, 1980; see also Lynn & Snyder, 2002). Consistent with
this idea, optimal distinctiveness theory proposes that although
difference is generally seen as a positive attribute, the desire to be
different is balanced by desires to conform and belong to others
(Brewer, 1991; Brewer & Gardner, 1996; Vignoles, Chryssochoou, & Breakwell, 2000).
One way in which people can satisfy their needs for belongingness and distinctiveness simultaneously is by differentiating themselves within a group, yet still remaining members of that group
(Hornsey & Jetten, 2004). Most relevant to our purposes, people’s
quest to be both similar and different can be promoted by conforming even more than other ingroup members to the norms of
the ingroup—that is, by being superior conformists (see Codol,
1975, 1984). Superior conformity may be a reflection of group
members’ tendencies to distinguish themselves in “good” ways
and avoid distinguishing themselves in “bad” ways (Blanton &
Christie, 2003).
Some evidence that group members prefer deviating from others
in a valued direction comes from the group polarization research of
Myers and his colleagues (Myers, 1978; Myers, Wojcicki, &
Aardema, 1977). In these studies, participants shifted their opinions in the direction of the prescriptive group norm—and away
from the descriptive group norm—when exposed to their peers’
attitudes. The presumed reason for their shift was that they wanted
to be not only similar to their peers but also superior to their peers
(Myers, 1978). If being different in a positive way (i.e., superior
conformity) does indeed satisfy the competing drives for similarity
and distinctiveness, then group members who hold extreme but
desirable positions (i.e., descriptive deviants) should feel more
comfortable publicizing their opinions than both those who hold
extreme but undesirable positions (i.e., prescriptive deviants) and
those who hold moderate positions (i.e., nondeviants). According
to the foregoing analysis, this proposed relation between deviance
direction and opinion expression arises because descriptive deviants believe that their opinions render them superior conformists.

873

If group members simply wanted to be similar to their peers,
nondeviants should be more vocal than deviants overall, and this
willingness to be vocal should be driven by nondeviants’ perceptions of similarity. If group members simply wanted to be different
from their peers, deviants should be more vocal than nondeviants
overall, and this willingness to be vocal should be driven by
deviants’ perceptions of difference, regardless of whether this
difference is “good” or “bad.”

The Present Studies
The foregoing analysis suggests that the willingness of deviants
to express their opinions should depend on whether the direction in
which they deviate from the group average is toward or away from
the prescriptive group norm. Descriptive deviants, whose opinions
are closer to the desirable (if not average) group opinion, should be
more likely to express their opinions than both nondeviants and
prescriptive deviants.
Studies 1 and 2 focused on the willingness of college students to
express their opinions on several important campus issues. For
each issue, it was possible to identify both the prescriptive norm
(the liberal position in all cases) and the descriptive norm (i.e., the
average attitude). In Study 1, the experimental procedure was to
ask participants to imagine arguing for one of three randomly
assigned positions: descriptive deviant, nondeviant, or prescriptive
deviant. This study tested the hypothesis that descriptive deviants’
perception of their superior conformity would mediate the relation
between descriptive deviance and self-reported comfort in opinion
expression. Study 1 also tested three additional mediational accounts for the greater comfort descriptive deviants felt in expressing their opinions. The first of these was that descriptive deviants,
more so than prescriptive deviants, perceive their opinions as
similar to those of the majority (Bassili, 2003; Glynn et al., 1997).
The second was that descriptive deviants are less likely than
prescriptive deviants to believe that they are different in a “bad”
way. The third was that descriptive deviants, more so than prescriptive deviants, believe that their (deviant) opinions will make
them popular within their peer group (Hensley & Duval, 1976;
Levine & Ranelli, 1978). The first two alternative accounts, if
ruled out, would further reinforce the idea that descriptive deviants
are more comfortable not because they see themselves as similar to
their peers but rather because they see themselves as “better”
group members than their peers.
In Study 2, we built upon Study 1 in three ways. First, rather
than measuring participants’ responses to a hypothetical scenario,
in Study 2 we actually assigned participants to deliver a speech in
support of one of three different attitude positions. Second, rather
than measuring participants’ felt discomfort in opinion expression,
in Study 2 we measured both self-reported and observer-rated
pride, an emotion presumed to be conceptually closer to the
construct of superior conformity. Finally, Study 2 included a
measure of actual behavior—namely, participants’ willingness to
have their assigned position made public. The specific hypothesis
tested in Study 2 was that participants assigned to argue for a
descriptive deviant position would experience (and be rated as
experiencing) higher levels of pride, as well as be more willing to
publicize their position, than would those assigned to argue for a
nondeviant or prescriptive deviant position.

MORRISON AND MILLER

874

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Study 3 was a field demonstration of opinion expression in
which we compared the proportions of political bumper stickers
with the proportions of registered voters in two different areas.
One area was a predominantly Democratic county, where the
descriptive norm was defined as slightly liberal and the prescriptive norm as liberal. The other was a predominantly Republican
county, where the descriptive norm was defined as slightly conservative and the prescriptive norm as conservative. The specific
hypothesis tested was that the messages on the bumper stickers
— compared with the actual percentages of voters—would overrepresent the descriptive deviant position and underrepresent the
prescriptive deviant position in each county.

Pretest
Our first step was to determine the normative positions among
the target group (undergraduates at Stanford University) on select
group-relevant issues. Specifically, we tested whether group members accurately perceived where they stood on each issue relative
to their peers and whether the distributions of group members’
attitudes were in fact unimodal rather than bimodal (see Nisbett &
Kunda, 1985). Only then could we claim that the average group
attitude, as opposed to an attitude on either extreme, did in fact
represent the nondeviant position on each issue. We also sought to
determine the prescriptive group norm on each issue in order to
ensure that it was different enough from the descriptive group
norm to distinguish descriptive deviants from nondeviants.
We measured descriptive and prescriptive group norms via a
survey that asked students for their attitudes on three different
issues: the wages of full-time (nonstudent) Stanford employees,
the presence of ethnic-theme dormitories on the Stanford campus,
and the use of affirmative action in college admissions decisions.
The survey included three questions on each issue, worded as
follows: (a) How would you best describe your own attitude
toward [the issue]? (b) How would you best describe the typical
Stanford student’s attitude toward [the issue]? and (c) How would
you best describe the attitude that Stanford students think they
should have toward [the issue], in order to fit in with their peers?
The first question was designed to assess the descriptive norm
(average group attitude) for the issue, the second question, perceptions of the descriptive norm, and the third question, perceptions of the prescriptive norm (desirable group attitude). The third
question was particularly important, as the use of the imperative
(i.e., “should”) helped to establish the direction in which the
students perceived social pressure to be operating.
Twenty-eight participants responded to these questions on
9-point scales (1 ⫽ much too low, 9 ⫽ much too high for the wages
questions; 1 ⫽ very strongly opposed, 9 ⫽ very strongly in favor
for the ethnic-theme dormitories and affirmative action questions).
Lower scores on the wages issue indicated greater degrees of
liberalism, as full-time Stanford employees are viewed as being
socioeconomically disadvantaged relative to the student population. Conversely, higher scores on the ethnic-theme dormitories
and affirmative action issues indicated greater degrees of liberalism.
We predicted that the prescriptive norm for each issue would be
liberal (as compared with the scale midpoint) and that the prescriptive norm for each issue would be significantly more liberal
than both students’ own attitude (actual descriptive norm) and their

perception of the typical student’s attitude (perceived descriptive
norm). Indeed, the prescriptive norms for all three issues fell on the
liberal end (i.e., as compared with the midpoint) of the scale:
t(27) ⫽ ⫺9.84, p ⬍ .001 for wages; t(27) ⫽ 4.77, p ⬍ .001 for
ethnic-theme dormitories; and t(27) ⫽ 4.88, p ⬍ .001 for affirmative action. Furthermore, in all but one (marginally significant)
case, the prescriptive norm was judged to be significantly more
liberal than both the actual and perceived descriptive norms, which
were at or near the scale midpoint (see Table 1 for means). The
actual and perceived descriptive norms did not differ significantly
for any of the issues. These results supported the claim that the
liberal position represents the prescriptive group norm and that the
descriptive and prescriptive norms diverge enough to classify
students who hold extreme attitudes (in a direction either consistent or inconsistent with the prescriptive norm) as deviants. They
also show that students, at least with respect to these issues, have
relatively accurate perceptions of where they stand relative to their
peers (see Nisbett & Kunda, 1985).

Study 1
Study 1 experimentally tested the hypothesis that people are
more comfortable expressing descriptive deviant opinions than
nondeviant or prescriptive deviant opinions. This was accomplished by randomly assigning participants to imagine that they
had to argue in support of a descriptive deviant, nondeviant, or
prescriptive deviant position on an issue and then measuring their
comfort in doing so. In addition, four potential mediators were
included. One of these assessed participants’ perceptions of the
desirability of the two forms of deviance, thereby permitting a
direct test of the mediational claim that descriptive deviants are
more comfortable because they know that their opinions render
them superior conformists (i.e., different from their peers in a
“good” way). The other three measures were included to permit
tests of alternative explanations. These questions asked how well
liked and popular participants believed their assigned position
would make them, how similar they believed their assigned position was to that of their peers, and how much they believed their
assigned position made them different from their peers in a “bad”

Table 1
Mean Attitudes of Participants Toward Each Issue, Pretest
Attitude

Own

Typical
Stanford
student’s

Socially
desirable

Issue

M

SD

M

SD

M

SD

Wages
Ethnic-theme dormitories
Affirmative action

4.07a
5.39ab
5.11a

1.51
2.10
2.17

3.43a
5.00a
5.11a

1.20
1.47
1.42

2.68b
6.32b
6.36b

1.25
1.47
1.47

Note. Ratings derived from a 9-point scale: 1 ⫽ much too low, 9 ⫽ much
too high for the wages question; 1 ⫽ very strongly opposed, 9 ⫽ very
strongly in favor for the ethnic-theme dormitories and affirmative action
questions. On wages question, lower scores ⫽ greater liberalism; on
dormitories and affirmative action questions, higher scores ⫽ greater
liberalism. Within each row, columns with different subscripts are significantly different from one another.

SILENT AND VOCAL MINORITIES

way. To the extent that descriptive deviants’ greater comfort was
driven by their perception of superior conformity, we would not
have expected their greater comfort to depend on their perception
that they were more positively evaluated or closer to the average
group opinion than were other group members.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Method
Participants. One hundred and thirty-six Stanford students (57
men, 77 women, 2 unspecified) participated in this questionnaire
experiment as part of a 1-hr-long mass testing session. They were
paid $20 upon completion of the entire session.
Materials and procedure. The questionnaire consisted of two
pages. On the first page, participants were asked to imagine being
required to deliver a speech to another student advocating a position on one of the three issues used in the pretest. The assigned
position was that of a descriptive deviant (much too low for wages,
strongly in favor for ethnic-theme dormitories and affirmative
action), a nondeviant (a little too low for wages, slightly in favor
for ethnic-theme dormitories and affirmative action), or a prescriptive deviant (much too high for wages, strongly opposed for
ethnic-theme dormitories and affirmative action). Participants
were further instructed to imagine that the other student believed
that the position they took in their speech was their true attitude.
After reading the scenario, participants indicated how comfortable and nervous they would feel delivering the speech (1 ⫽ not at
all, 9 ⫽ very much). Responses to the two items were averaged
(and the nervousness item was reverse coded) to form a composite
(r ⫽ .32, p ⬍ .001). Finally, participants responded to several
questions about their assigned position, also on a scale from 1 (not
at all) to 9 (very much). Specifically, they indicated the extent to
which actually holding their assigned position would make them
similar to their peers (similarity), different from their peers in a
good way (superior conformity), and different from their peers in
a bad way (different but bad). They also indicated the extent to
which actually holding their assigned position would make them
well liked by and popular among their peers. These two items were
averaged to form a liking index (r ⫽ .75, p ⬍ .001).

Results
We hypothesized that participants assigned to express descriptive deviant opinions would report feeling more comfortable and
less nervous than those assigned to express either nondeviant or
prescriptive deviant opinions. To test this hypothesis, we first
submitted the results to a 3 (position: descriptive deviant vs.
nondeviant vs. prescriptive deviant) ⫻ 3 (issue: wages vs. ethnictheme dormitories vs. affirmative action) analysis of variance
(ANOVA). The main dependent variable of interest was the comfort/nervousness composite, but we also conducted parallel analyses on each of the ancillary measures described earlier. Because
these analyses revealed no main effects of issue and no Position ⫻
Issue interactions, we collapsed the results across the three issues.
For each dependent measure, we ran a one-way ANOVA to
examine the overall effect of assigned position. We also ran a
planned contrast comparing descriptive deviants (coded as 2) to
both nondeviants and prescriptive deviants (both coded as –1).
(For a list of means and differences between individual conditions,
see Table 2.)

875

Table 2
Mean Ratings of Participants by Assigned Position and
Dependent Measure, Study 1
Descriptive
deviant

Nondeviant

Prescriptive
deviant

Feeling/perception

M

SD

M

SD

M

SD

Comfort/nervousness
Similarity to others
Superior conformity—
“different but good”
“Different but bad”
Liking by others

5.50a
5.38a

1.98
1.69

5.09ab
5.33a

1.69
1.52

4.49b
3.70b

2.12
2.26

4.87a
3.20a
4.78a

2.50
2.05
2.07

4.18a
2.91a
4.20a

2.17
1.82
1.82

3.09b
4.73b
2.72b

2.19
2.86
1.57

Note. Ratings derived from a 9-point scale (1 ⫽ not at all, 9 ⫽ very
much) indicating participants’ comfort/nervousness about advocating the
assigned position and the extent to which advocating the position made
them similar to, different from (in a good way and a bad way), and liked
by their peers. Within each row, columns with different subscripts are
significantly different from one another.

Comfort/nervousness. The overall effect of assigned position
was significant, F(2, 133) ⫽ 3.12, p ⬍ .05, ␩2p ⫽ .045. Consistent
with predictions, those assigned to be descriptive deviants reported
being more comfortable and less nervous than did those assigned
to be nondeviants and prescriptive deviants, t(133) ⫽ 2.04, p ⬍
.05.
Similarity. The overall effect of assigned position was significant, F(2, 133) ⫽ 11.98, p ⬍ .001, ␩2p ⫽ .153. Those assigned to
be descriptive deviants felt more similar to their peers than did
those assigned to be nondeviants and prescriptive deviants,
t(133) ⫽ 2.60, p ⫽ .01.
Superior conformity. The overall effect of assigned position
was significant, F(2, 132) ⫽ 6.86, p ⫽ .001, ␩2p ⫽ .094.1 Those
assigned to be descriptive deviants were more inclined than those
assigned to be nondeviants and prescriptive deviants to believe that
their positions made them superior conformists (i.e., different but
good), t(132) ⫽ 2.97, p ⬍ .005.
Different but bad. The overall effect of assigned position was
significant, F(2, 132) ⫽ 8.14, p ⬍ .001, ␩2p ⫽ .110. However, those
assigned to be descriptive deviants were no less likely than those
assigned to be nondeviants or prescriptive deviants to believe that
their positions made them different but bad, t(132) ⫽ ⫺1.50, p ⬍
.14.
Liking. The overall effect of assigned position was significant,
F(2, 129) ⫽ 16.64, p ⬍ .001, ␩2p ⫽ .205. Those assigned to be
descriptive deviants were more likely than those assigned to be
nondeviants or prescriptive deviants to report that their assigned
positions would make them well liked and popular, t(129) ⫽ 4.17,
p ⬍ .001.
Mediational analyses. To test whether the relationship between assigned position (i.e., descriptive deviance) and comfort
was driven by feelings of superior conformity, as opposed to
assumptions of similarity, feelings of being “different but bad”
(among prescriptive deviants), or liking, we conducted mediational
1
The difference in degrees of freedom is due to the fact that one
participant (or more, for some of the ancillary measures) did not respond
to the item.

MORRISON AND MILLER

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

876

analyses using multiple regression (see Baron & Kenny, 1986).
For each analysis, we regressed the comfort composite onto the
term comparing descriptive deviants to both other conditions, the
term comparing nondeviants to prescriptive deviants (to control for
differences between these two groups), and the proposed mediator.
As noted above, the relation between assigned position and comfort was significant, as were the relations between assigned position and each proposed mediator except “different but bad” (i.e.,
similarity, superior conformity, and liking). Thus, three of the four
potential mediators satisfied Baron and Kenny’s (1986) first two
criteria and were submitted to mediational analyses.
When the comfort composite was regressed onto assigned position and similarity, there was no relationship between similarity
and comfort, ␤ ⫽ .132, t(132) ⫽ 1.44, p ⫽ .15. This finding
indicates that perceived similarity did not mediate the effect of
assigned position on comfort.
When the comfort composite was regressed onto assigned position and the superior conformity measure, superior conformity
and comfort were significantly correlated, ␤ ⫽ .217, t(131) ⫽
2.47, p ⬍ .02. However, the relation between assigned position and
comfort was reduced to nonsignificance, ␤ ⫽ .111, t(131) ⫽ 1.28,
p ⫽ .20. A Sobel test revealed that this reduction was marginally
significant, z ⫽ 1.90, p ⬍ .06. This finding, consistent with
predictions, indicates that feelings of superior conformity partially
mediated the effect of assigned position on comfort (see Figure 1).
When the comfort composite was regressed onto assigned position and liking, there was no relation between liking and comfort,
␤ ⫽ .152, t(128) ⫽ 1.58, p ⬎ .11. This finding indicates that liking
did not mediate the effect of assigned position on comfort.

Discussion
Study 1 demonstrated that group members experimentally assigned to argue for a descriptive deviant position were more
comfortable expressing that position than were those assigned a
prescriptive deviant or nondeviant position. The results strengthen
the claim that the greater comfort of descriptive than prescriptive
deviants derives from descriptive deviants’ perception that their
position distinguishes them from their peers in a positive way,
hence rendering them superior conformists.
Study 1 also ruled out two plausible alternative routes by which
the observed relation between descriptive deviance and comfort
might arise. The first of these involves the possibility that descriptive deviants’ greater willingness to express their opinions is due to
a perception that they are similar to the rest of the group (Bassili,
2003; Glynn et al., 1997). The present findings argue strongly
against this account. Though descriptive deviants did perceive
themselves as being more similar to their peers than did nondeviants and prescriptive deviants, there was no relation between their

Superior conformity
.246**

Position (2 –1 –1)

.217*

.111 (.173*)

Comfort/nervousness

Figure 1. Mediational analysis, Study 1.*p ⬍ .05.

**

p ⬍ .01.

perceptions of similarity and their comfort in opinion expression.
Instead, descriptive deviants were more comfortable expressing
their opinions because they clearly recognized that their opinions
differed from the group average, albeit in a direction consistent
with the prescriptive norm.
A second possibility is that descriptive deviants, relative to
prescriptive deviants and nondeviants, believe that their opinions
will make them more popular and well liked among their peers.
Consistent with previous research on reactions to opinion deviants
(e.g., Hensley & Duval, 1976; Levine & Ranelli, 1978), Study 1
did find a positive effect of descriptive deviance on anticipated
liking by others. However, this effect did not mediate descriptive
deviants’ greater comfort in opinion expression. It is possible that
anticipated liking may prove to be a more critical predictor of
opinion expression when nondeviants are simply compared with
deviants, as opposed to when certain (i.e., descriptive) deviants are
compared with other group members.

Study 2
In Study 2, we moved beyond a vignette methodology by
assigning participants to actually deliver a speech in support of a
particular position on a controversial issue and then measuring
both their self-reported pride and their pride as rated by an observer. If descriptive deviants do in fact believe that they are
different in a good way, then they should be proud of themselves
for “one-upping” their peers, not merely relieved (i.e., comfortable) as a result of fitting in with their peers (see Myers, 1978).
Indeed, pride-related emotions are generally thought to convey
one’s successes and achievements to oneself and one’s group,
thereby serving to enhance one’s social status—that is, to make
one seem superior to one’s peers (Tracy & Robins, 2007). Study 2
also included a behavioral measure of opinion expression—the
extent to which participants were willing to have their assigned
opinion made public. We hypothesized that participants assigned
to argue for a descriptive deviant (relative to nondeviant or prescriptive deviant) opinion would both experience more priderelated emotions and be more willing to publicly express their
assigned opinion.

Method
Participants. Thirty-four Stanford undergraduates participated
in this experiment. Participants were randomly assigned to one of
three conditions: descriptive deviant (n ⫽ 12), nondeviant (n ⫽
12), or prescriptive deviant (n ⫽ 10). The experiment took approximately 30 min, and participants were paid $8. One participant
was omitted from the analyses because she had previously participated in a similar experiment, and 3 more were excluded because
they indicated that they did not know what affirmative action was.
The data from the remaining 30 participants (17 women, 13 men)
were retained in the final sample.
Materials and procedure. Participants were tested individually. Upon arrival, they were greeted by an experimenter and given
a page of written instructions. Participants read that the purpose of
the study was to “assess people’s reactions to different types of
arguments” and that they would prepare a short speech on a
controversial issue. They further read that their speech would be
videotaped and shown to another Stanford student in a different

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

SILENT AND VOCAL MINORITIES

experimental session. More specifically, they learned that they
would be assigned to argue in support of a particular attitude
position on an issue and that whoever viewed the videotape would
think that this position represented their true attitude. Participants
were instructed to play along as best they could with the experimental deceit and to not give any indication of their real attitude
during the speech.
Next, the experimenter explained that the issue and position
were written on the next page and that participants could also use
that page for notes. In all cases, the issue was the use of affirmative
action in college admissions decisions. However, participants were
assigned to take one of three different positions: descriptive deviant (strongly in favor—affirmative action is definitely a good
thing), nondeviant (slightly in favor—affirmative action is probably a good thing, though there are some potential problems with
it), or prescriptive deviant (strongly opposed—affirmative action is
definitely a bad thing). The experimenter left the room and gave
participants 5 min to prepare the speech, which, they were told,
could be as short or long as they wanted.
Once the 5 min had passed, the experimenter re-entered the
room with the video camera and recorded the speech. She then
gave participants a packet of paper-and-pencil questionnaires,
which contained two of the three dependent measures. The first
was a 7-item measure of achievement pride (Tracy & Robins,
2007). The scale items (e.g., accomplished, confident) were interspersed with other pride-irrelevant emotions (e.g., critical, optimistic) to disguise the purpose of the experiment. Participants
responded on a 5-point scale (1 ⫽ not at all, 5 ⫽ extremely)
according to how they had felt during the speech, with higher
scores reflecting higher levels of pride. The measure demonstrated
good reliability (␣ ⫽ .92).
The second dependent variable was the behavioral measure of
public opinion expression. Following a series of filler questionnaires designed to further minimize suspicion, participants read
that ethically the researchers could not use the videotape of the
speech in future experimental sessions unless participants were
comfortable with their doing so. Participants then indicated
whether they wanted their speech to be shown to another participant (0 ⫽ no, 1 ⫽ yes). Participants were told that in all cases they
would be identified by participant number and not by name and
that they would receive full payment regardless of which choice
they made.
At the end of the experiment, participants completed a suspicion
probe and were fully debriefed. Specifically, they learned that their
speech would never be shown to another participant and that it
would only be used for coding purposes within the lab. They were
then paid, thanked, and dismissed. None of the participants reported any awareness of the true experimental hypothesis.
Video coding. After the data had been collected, all videotapes
were viewed by a coder who was blind to the experimental
hypothesis. The coder used a 5-point scale (1 ⫽ not at all, 5 ⫽
extremely) to rate each participant on two pride-related emotions:
proud and confident. Because the coder’s two ratings were highly
correlated, r(30) ⫽ .84, p ⬍ .001, they were averaged to form a
composite. Participants’ scores on this composite were marginally correlated with their self-reported pride scores, r(30) ⫽ .29,
p ⫽ .12.

877

Results
Self-reported pride. We hypothesized that participants assigned to argue for the descriptive deviant position would report
higher levels of pride than those assigned to argue for both the
nondeviant and prescriptive deviant positions. To test this hypothesis, we submitted participants’ self-reported pride scores to a
one-way ANOVA. Paralleling the analytic strategy used in Study
1, participants in the descriptive deviant condition (coded as 2)
were compared with participants in both of the other conditions
(coded as –1).
The overall omnibus test was significant, F(2, 27) ⫽ 5.62, p ⬍
.01, ␩2p ⫽ .294. In addition, the planned contrast was significant,
t(27) ⫽ 3.21, p ⬍ .01, indicating that participants in the descriptive
deviant condition felt more proud during their speeches than did
those in either the nondeviant condition or the prescriptive deviant
condition (see Table 3).
Observer-rated pride. We hypothesized that participants assigned to argue for the descriptive deviant position would be rated
as more proud than those assigned to argue for both the nondeviant
and prescriptive deviant positions. To test this hypothesis, we
submitted participants’ pride scores (as rated by the coder) to a
one-way ANOVA and planned contrast, as described earlier.
The overall omnibus test was marginal, F(2, 27) ⫽ 2.91, p ⫽
.07, ␩2p ⫽ .177. However, the planned contrast attained significance, t(27) ⫽ 2.13, p ⫽ .04, indicating that participants in the
descriptive deviant condition—relative to those in the other two
conditions—appeared to an outside observer to be more proud (see
Table 3).
Behavioral opinion expression. We hypothesized that participants in the descriptive deviant condition would be more willing to
give the researchers permission to use their videotape in future
research than would participants assigned to the other two conditions. This hypothesis was confirmed, ␹2(2, N ⫽ 30) ⫽ 7.08, p ⬍
.03. In total, 5 participants (50%) in the descriptive deviant condition, 0 participants (0%) in the nondeviant condition, and 2
participants (20%) in the prescriptive deviant condition gave permission for their videotape to be shown to another student.

Discussion
The results of Study 2 demonstrate that the relation between
descriptive deviance and opinion expression is not limited to
hypothetical situations, nor is it limited to self-reported feelings of
comfort. When participants were actually instructed to deliver a
speech on a controversial issue, those who took the position of a
Table 3
Mean Self-Reported and Observer-Rated Pride by Condition,
Study 2
Descriptive
deviant

Nondeviant

Prescriptive
deviant

Pride

M

SD

M

SD

M

SD

Self-reported
Observer-rated

2.90a
3.35a

1.02
1.03

1.79b
2.40b

.58
.66

2.09b
2.85ab

.63
.91

Note. Within each row, columns with different subscripts are significantly different from one another.

MORRISON AND MILLER

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

878

descriptive deviant reported feeling and were rated by an observer
as being more proud than did those who took either the nondeviant
or prescriptive deviant position. Furthermore, participants in the
descriptive deviant condition were especially willing to give permission for their speeches to be used in future research.
One potential limitation of Study 2 (as well as Study 1) is the
fact that the descriptive deviant position was always the liberal
position. Thus, it cannot be ruled out that those holding extremely
liberal positions tend generally to be more comfortable expressing
their opinions than do their more conservative peers, even when
the liberal position does not represent the prescriptive group norm.
The fact that participants were more comfortable expressing descriptive deviant (extremely liberal) positions when the positions
were not their own and had merely been assigned to them is
reassuring, but still it is not conclusive. A more compelling demonstration would show that descriptive deviants were more comfortable expressing their opinions even when those opinions were
conservative. We sought to perform just such a demonstration in
Study 3. In addition, unlike Studies 1 and 2, Study 3 employed a
measure of opinion expression that occurred naturally in the field.

Study 3
One form of opinion expression (especially in political domains)
is the display of bumper stickers on one’s vehicle. The aftermath
of the 2004 U.S. presidential election provided an appropriate
context in which to examine this form of opinion expression
among descriptive and prescriptive deviants. In Study 3, we accomplished this by recording the proportions of pro-Democratic
and pro-Republican bumper stickers in two different counties of
California: a “Blue” county (i.e., one with more registered Democrats than Republicans) and a “Red” county (i.e., one with more
registered Republicans than Democrats).
We argue that the distinction between Democratic and Republican bumper sticker holders is not simply that between individuals
who espouse the majority and minority positions in each location.
A bumper sticker supporting a particular political candidate or
party identifies one not just as a member of a minority or majority
group but as an especially committed member of that group. Thus,
we argue—indeed, we demonstrate in survey results reported—
that displaying a sticker on one’s vehicle in support of a candidate
is a sufficiently distinctive act that it qualifies one as a statistical
deviant, irrespective of majority/minority status. For purposes of
this study, Democratic sticker holders were classified as descriptive deviants in the Blue county and prescriptive deviants in the
Red county. Conversely, Republican sticker holders were categorized as descriptive deviants in the Red county and prescriptive
deviants in the Blue county.
We hypothesized that, irrespective of the prescriptive county
norm, descriptive deviant stickers would be overrepresented and
prescriptive deviant stickers underrepresented in each county.
More precisely, we expected that the ratio of descriptive deviant
stickers to prescriptive deviant stickers in each county would be
significantly higher than the ratio of descriptive deviant voters to
prescriptive deviant voters.

Method
The study was conducted at six different Target store locations—three in Santa Clara County (the Blue county) and three in

San Diego County (the Red county)— over a 2-week period in
March 2005. There were 8 days of data collection in total. To
minimize the chances that the same sticker would be counted more
than once (e.g., on different days or at different times), we assigned one researcher to each parking lot. On the days of the study,
the researchers spent approximately 45 min circulating around the
parking lots of each store and tallying the numbers of political
bumper stickers that were displayed. Pro-Kerry and anti-Bush
stickers were both considered to indicate Democratic voters,
whereas pro-Bush stickers were classified as indicating Republican voters.2 There were no anti-Kerry stickers in either county.
To measure additional variables of potential interest, the researchers put an addressed and stamped envelope containing a
short survey on all sticker-sporting vehicles. Of the 53 individuals
with bumper stickers on their vehicles, 30 (57%) returned the
survey. Respondents were asked to indicate how they themselves
felt about George W. Bush and John Kerry, as well as how they
thought the average resident of their county felt about the two
candidates. Responses to these questions were made on a 10-point
scale (1 ⫽ don’t like him at all, 10 ⫽ like him very much). The
order in which the questions about Bush and Kerry were presented
was counterbalanced across participants.
Although participants were not asked to specify their county of
residence, the survey items were worded to pertain to either San
Diego County or Santa Clara County (e.g., “How would you
describe the average San Diego [Santa Clara] County resident’s
feelings toward George W. Bush [John Kerry]?”). Thus, we can be
reasonably assured that participants who provided answers to these
questions were from the county in which the study was conducted.
Only 1 participant—a Republican sticker holder in San Diego
County— indicated that he or she was not a resident of that county
and thus did not complete the survey. The data from that participant were omitted from all subsequent analyses.

Results and Discussion
Bumper sticker ratios. The results from this study were analyzed using chi-square tests and are depicted in Table 4. As a
manipulation check (i.e., establishing that descriptive deviants in
both Santa Clara and San Diego counties were more vocal than
prescriptive deviants), we first looked at the prevalence of Democratic and Republican bumper stickers in each locale. As expected, in Santa Clara County, the number of Democratic (descriptive deviant) bumper stickers exceeded the number of Republican
(prescriptive deviant) stickers. In San Diego County, however,
there were more Republican (descriptive deviant) stickers than
Democratic (prescriptive deviant) stickers. The difference between
the counties was significant, ␹2(1, N ⫽ 52) ⫽ 21.0, p ⬍ .001.
Next, we tested our hypothesis that descriptive deviant stickers
would be overrepresented in both Santa Clara and San Diego
counties. To do this, we compared the proportion of descriptive
deviant (vs. prescriptive deviant) stickers to that of descriptive
deviant (vs. prescriptive deviant) registered voters in each locale
2

It would have been interesting to separate pro-Kerry and anti-Bush
stickers into different categories and compare their popularities within each
county. However, given our small sample size, we were unable to perform
such an analysis.

SILENT AND VOCAL MINORITIES

879

Table 4
Proportions of Democratic and Republican Bumper Stickers and Registered Voters in Santa
Clara and San Diego Counties, California, Study 3
Santa Clara County
Democratica

Republicanb

Democraticb

Republicana

Variable

%

n

%

n

%

n

%

n

Bumper stickers
Registered voters

93.0
62.9

14

7.0
37.1

1

27.0
43.0

10

73.0
57.0

27

a
b

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

San Diego County

Descriptive deviant.
Prescriptive deviant.

(California Secretary of State, 2004).3 Consistent with our hypothesis, the ratio of Democratic-to-Republican stickers was significantly higher than the ratio of Democratic-to-Republican registered voters in Santa Clara County, ␹2(1, N ⫽ 15) ⫽ 7.10, p ⬍ .01,
indicating that the descriptive deviant (Democratic) voice was
indeed overrepresented in the population. However, the
Democratic-to-Republican sticker ratio was significantly lower
than the Democratic-to-Republican registered voter ratio in San
Diego County, ␹2(1, N ⫽ 37) ⫽ 3.85, p ⬍ .05 (see Table 4). That
is, there were disproportionately more descriptive deviant (Republican) stickers than prescriptive deviant (Democratic) stickers.
Survey results. The first goal of the survey was to establish
that displaying a bumper sticker identifies oneself as an extremist
(i.e., a descriptive or prescriptive deviant), regardless of majority
or minority status. To do so, we compared Democratic and Republican respondents’ own feelings toward Bush and Kerry—as
reported in the survey—with those of the average resident of their
county, using paired samples t tests. Supporting the assumption
that bumper sticker holders perceived themselves to be extreme
partisans, Democratic respondents in each county reported that
they liked Kerry and disliked Bush significantly more than did the
average resident of their county. Conversely, Republican respondents in San Diego County reported that they both liked Bush and
disliked Kerry significantly more than did the average San Diego
County resident (see Table 5). We could not conduct a similar
analysis with Republican Santa Clara County residents because
there was only 1 such individual in our sample. These findings
demonstrated that both descriptive and prescriptive deviants were
aware that their opinions were statistically extreme.
The survey results also allowed us to rule out a feasible alternative explanation for the disproportionate sticker-to-vote ratios:
specifically, that descriptive deviants (i.e., Democrats) in Santa
Clara County are simply more extreme than prescriptive deviants
(i.e., Democrats) in San Diego County. In fact, San Diego County
Democrats liked Kerry (n ⫽ 7, M ⫽ 8.29, SD ⫽ 0.95) just as much
as their Santa Clara County counterparts did (n ⫽ 10, M ⫽ 8.30,
SD ⫽ 0.95), t(15) ⫽ ⫺.03, ns. Further, there was no difference in
the extent to which Democrats from each county disliked Bush
(M ⫽ 1.14, SD ⫽ 0.38 for San Diego County; M ⫽ 1.40, SD ⫽
0.85 for Santa Clara County), t(15) ⫽ ⫺1.04, ns. Given the limited
number of Santa Clara County Republicans in our sample, we
could not compare Republicans from Santa Clara County with
those from San Diego County.
Summary. Study 3 showed that descriptive deviants were more
willing to express their political opinions via bumper stickers than

were prescriptive deviants, regardless of whether descriptive deviance was defined as extremely liberal or extremely conservative.
This phenomenon occurred even though sticker holders in each
county had a generally accurate perception of how their feelings
toward each of the two presidential candidates compared with
those of the average resident of their county. In fact, in light of the
results of Studies 1 and 2, descriptive deviants’ awareness of their
superior conformity may have been what prompted them to publicize their position in the first place.

General Discussion
The present research takes as its point of departure the assumption that there are two norms from which group members can
deviate. The first is the descriptive or statistical norm of the group;
individual members’ attitudes can be closer to or further from the
average attitude. The second is the prescriptive or prototypical
norm of the group; individual members’ attitudes can be closer to
or further from the desirable attitude. The existence of these two
(often imperfectly correlated) standards means that deviance can
take two forms: divergence from the average attitude and divergence from the desirable attitude. Members who deviate from the
descriptive norm of the group in a direction away from the prescriptive norm are deviants with respect to both standards. We
have used the term prescriptive deviants to describe them. On the
other hand, members who deviate from the descriptive norm in the
direction of the prescriptive norm are deviants in relation to the
first standard, but not in relation to the second. We have used the
term descriptive deviants to describe them. The present research
thus departs from traditional perspectives on opinion expression, in
which opinions tend to be dichotomously categorized as minority/
majority (e.g., Asch, 1956; Matz & Wood, 2005) or to be defined
solely based on the magnitude of deviation from the group average
(e.g., Bassili, 2003; Glynn et al., 1997). In so doing, the present
research introduces a novel framework for classifying (and predicting the behavior of) those group members who hold deviant
opinions.
3

We used the percentages of registered voters, rather than the percentages of residents who actually voted for Bush and Kerry, because the
former were available for each particular city in which data were collected.
The latter were only available countywide. Thus, the data on the percentages of registered voters in each county allowed a more precise test of our
hypothesis.

MORRISON AND MILLER

880

Table 5
Bumper Sticker Holders’ Ratings of George W. Bush and John Kerry by County, Study 3
Ratings
Bush
Average
resident

Self
County

Kerry
Average
resident

Self

Party affiliation

M

SD

M

SD

t

M

SD

M

SD

t

Democratic
Republican

1.14
9.18

0.38
0.75

5.86
7.45

1.46
1.63

9.04*
3.19*

8.29
1.64

0.95
1.03

5.57
3.73

1.13
1.27

6.45*
5.04*

Democratic

1.50

0.85

3.70

1.42 ⫺4.70*

8.30

0.95

7.30

0.95

2.37*

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

San Diego
Santa Clara

Note. Ratings derived from 10-point scale (1 ⫽ don’t like him at all, 10 ⫽ like him very much).
*
p ⬍ .05

The distinction between descriptive and prescriptive deviants
suggests that not all those whose attitudes diverge from the group
average will feel equally deviant. Specifically, those group members whose opinions are statistically extreme but congruent with
the prescriptive norm will feel less deviant, and hence will be more
willing to express their attitudes, than will those group members
whose opinions are both statistically extreme and incongruent with
the prescriptive norm, as well as those group members whose
attitudes are not extreme. Our proposed explanation for this result
is that while both descriptive and prescriptive deviants recognize
that their opinions render them different from their peers, the
former— but not the latter—also think that their extreme opinions
render them superior conformists (i.e., different in a good way)
relative to their peers, even their nondeviant peers. The present
studies provide strong support for this hypothesis.
In Studies 1 and 2, we found a consistent relation between
direction of deviance and opinion expression among college students. Study 1 showed that participants were more comfortable
expressing descriptive deviant (vs. nondeviant or prescriptive deviant) opinions that were randomly assigned to them and that the
relation between descriptive deviance and comfort was mediated
by descriptive deviants’ perception of superior conformity (i.e.,
that they differed from their peers in a good way). Study 2 found
that participants assigned to argue for a descriptive deviant position experienced more pride, were rated as being more proud by an
observer, and were more willing to publicly express their assigned
position than were participants assigned to argue for a nondeviant
or prescriptive deviant position. Study 3 replicated the first two
studies in a field context and demonstrated that descriptive deviants were more vocal than prescriptive deviants, regardless of
whether the prescriptive group norm was liberal (as it was in
Studies 1 and 2) or conservative.

Deviance, Superior Conformity, and Opinion Expression
The present studies found that descriptive deviants were aware
that their opinions diverged from that of the average group member (an indicator of difference). However, because they knew that
their opinions conformed to the prescriptive group norm (an indicator of similarity), they were not rendered uncomfortable by their

divergence from the average group opinion. In fact, they felt
superior to their peers and proud of themselves as a result of being
deviant (see Blanton & Christie, 2003; Myers, 1978). These findings are consistent with the idea that people strive to satisfy their
competing needs for similarity and difference (e.g., Brewer, 1991;
Hornsey & Jetten, 2004; Snyder & Fromkin, 1980). However, our
findings extend the idea by providing empirical evidence for a
strategy through which these needs can be satisfied. Specifically,
individuals can conform even more than other group members to
group norms (Codol, 1975)—in the present context, by expressing
opinions that make them different but good.
An important conclusion of the present research is that holding
deviant attitudes will not inevitably produce conflict in people
(e.g., Bassili, 2003; Matz & Wood, 2005; Nemeth & Wachtler,
1983). Group members holding deviant attitudes will only experience marginality, and the attendant reluctance to express their
attitudes, when they perceive that their attitudes diverge not just
from the average group opinion but also from the desirable group
opinion. Those whose attitudes diverge from the average group
opinion but not from the desirable group opinion will actually feel
emboldened by the knowledge that their attitudes make them
superior conformists.
In demonstrating that descriptive deviants are more willing to
express their opinions because of feelings of superior conformity,
our research distinguishes itself from that of Abrams and colleagues (Abrams et al., 2000, 2002, 2005). Because a key assumption of their model is that people seek to differentiate their ingroup
from outgroups, they too may have predicted that descriptive
deviants (or more generally, those who validate group norms to the
extreme) would be more vocal than either prescriptive deviants (or
more generally, those who invalidate group norms to the extreme)
or nondeviants. However, Abrams et al. did not test this prediction
directly, nor did they show that descriptive deviants seek to distinguish themselves within their group by being superior conformists. Future research should determine whether descriptive deviants
exhibit higher levels of opinion expression not only because they
perceive themselves as different but good, but also because they
perceive themselves as helping to clarify the norms of the ingroup.
For example, it is possible that the relation between descriptive

SILENT AND VOCAL MINORITIES

deviance and opinion expression is strongest when the norms of
the ingroup are made salient (Marques, Abrams, Paez, & MartinezTaboada, 1998; Marques, Abrams, & Serodio, 2001) or when
differences between the ingroup and a relevant outgroup are reinforced (Abrams et al., 2000, 2002).

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Opinion Expression in Single-Group Versus Two-Group
Contexts
As noted in the introduction, the present article focused on
contexts involving a single group whose members’ attitudes toward particular issues were roughly normally distributed. In Studies 1 and 2, we measured the willingness of college students on a
moderately liberal campus to express their attitudes toward important campus issues to their peers. In Study 3, we measured the
willingness of county residents to display either liberal or conservative political bumper stickers on their vehicles. However, because previous research has suggested that perceptions of group
members’ attitudes are often affected by the social context
(Doosje, Haslam, Spears, Oakes, & Koomen, 1998; Ellemers,
Spears, & Doosje, 2002), we might predict different results depending on which group identity is most accessible in people’s
minds. For instance, if participants in Studies 1 and 2 had been
thinking about their political identity (i.e., as liberal or conservative) instead of their Stanford student identity, then they likely
would have perceived the distribution of student attitudes as bimodal rather than normal. In other words, they would have perceived Stanford students to be divided into two groups with two
prescriptive norms (liberal and conservative), instead of a single
group with one prescriptive norm (liberal).
When a single group context is inferred, then descriptive deviants—as demonstrated in the present studies—should be more
likely than other group members to feel emboldened because their
position as descriptive deviants sets them apart from their peers in
a direction consistent with the (single) prescriptive group norm. By
contrast, when a two-group context is inferred, the concept of
descriptive deviance should carry less relevance because group
members on either extreme would be considered nondeviants or
majorities within that population. Group members who hold moderate attitudes would be considered deviants or minorities within
both populations, given their departure from both prescriptive
group norms (see Levine & Ranelli, 1978). In this situation, the
relation between descriptive deviance and opinion expression
would not necessarily emerge, nor would the relationship between
descriptive deviance and perceptions of superior conformity. Instead, those with extreme attitudes would simply be more willing
to express their opinions within their group than those with moderate attitudes, perhaps because the former feel similar to or well
liked by other group members.

Conclusion
The present results suggest that the public discourse in groups
with strong social identities will tend to be skewed away from the
average position of the group in the direction of the desirable
position of the group. What this means in relation to NoelleNeumann’s (1984) speculation about a “spiral of silence” is that
those group members whose private positions deviate from both
the descriptive and prescriptive norms are especially prone to

881

remaining silent. By contrast, those group members whose private
positions deviate from the descriptive (but not prescriptive) norm
are especially prone to voicing their opinions.
In our studies, we found that group members were reasonably
accurate in their perceptions of the distance between their own
attitude and the average group attitude. Over time, however, descriptive deviants’ willingness to speak out could lead to pluralistic
ignorance and a mistaken sense of the group position by both
ingroup and outgroup members (Miller & McFarland, 1987; Prentice & Miller, 1996). It could also induce a gradual shift in the
private opinions of group members toward the desirable opinion
(see Myers, 1978; Paicheler, 1977). The changing of descriptive
and prescriptive group norms in this manner, in turn, further
increases political and ideological extremism.

References
Abrams, D., de Moura, G. R., Hutchison, P., & Viki, G. T. (2005). When
bad becomes good (and vice versa): Why social exclusion is not based
on difference. In D. Abrams, M. A. Hogg, & J. M. Marques (Eds.),
Social exclusion and inclusion (pp. 161–191). Hove, East Sussex, United
Kingdom: Psychology Press.
Abrams, D., Marques, J., Bown, N., & Dougill, M. (2002). Anti-norm and
pro-norm deviance in the bank and on the campus: Two experiments on
subjective group dynamics. Group Processes & Intergroup Relations, 5,
163–182.
Abrams, D., Marques, J. M., Bown, N., & Henson, M. (2000). Pro-norm
and anti-norm deviance within and between groups. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 78, 906 –912.
Asch, S. E. (1956). Studies of independence and conformity: A minority of
one against a unanimous majority. Psychological Monographs, 70,
(Whole no. 416).
Baron, R. M., & Kenny, D. A. (1986). The moderator–mediator variable
distinction in social psychological research: Conceptual, strategic, and
statistical considerations. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
51, 1173–1182.
Bassili, J. N. (1995). On the psychological reality of party identification:
Evidence from the accessibility of voting intentions and of partisan
feelings. Political Behavior, 17, 339 –358.
Bassili, J. N. (2003). The minority slowness effect: Subtle inhibitions in the
expression of views not shared by others. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 84, 261–276.
Blanton, H., & Christie, C. (2003). Deviance regulation: A theory of
identity and action. Review of General Psychology, 7, 115–149.
Brewer, M. B. (1991). The social self: On being the same and different at
the same time. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 17, 475–
482.
Brewer, M. B., & Gardner, W. (1996). Who is this we? Levels of collective
identity and self-representations. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 71, 83–93.
California Secretary of State. (2004, 18 October). Report of registration:
Registration by political subdivision by county. Retrieved October 16,
2007, from http://www.ss.ca.gov/elections/ror_10182004.htm
Cialdini, R. B., Reno, R. R., & Kallgren, C. A. (1990). A focus theory of
normative conduct: Recycling the concept of norms to reduce littering in
public places. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 58, 1015–
1026.
Cialdini, R. B., & Trost, M. R. (1998). Social influence, social norms,
conformity, and compliance. In D. T. Gilbert, S. T. Fiske, & G. Lindzey
(Eds.), The handbook of social psychology (Vol. 2, pp. 151–192). New
York: Oxford University Press.
Codol, J.-P. (1975). On the so-called “superior conformity of the self”
behavior: Twenty experimental investigations. European Journal of
Social Psychology, 5, 457–501.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

882

MORRISON AND MILLER

Codol, J-P. (1984). Social differentiation and non-differentiation. In G.
Tajfel (Ed.), The social dimension (pp. 314 – 337). Cambridge, United
Kingdom: Cambridge University Press.
Doosje, B., Haslam, S. A., Spears, R., Oakes, P. J., & Koomen, W. (1998).
The effect of comparative context on central tendency and variability
judgments and the evaluation of group characteristics. European Journal
of Social Psychology, 28, 173–184.
Ellemers, N., Spears, R., & Doosje, B. (2002). Self and social identity.
Annual Review of Psychology, 53, 161–186.
Glynn, C. J., Hayes, A. F., & Shanahan, J. (1997). Perceived support for
one’s opinions and willingness to speak out: A meta-analysis of survey
studies on the “spiral of silence.” Public Opinion Quarterly, 51, 452–
463.
Hensley, V., & Duval, S. (1976). Some perceptual determinants of perceived similarity, liking, and correctness. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 34, 159 –168.
Hornsey, M. J., & Jetten, J. (2004). The individual within the group:
Balancing the need to belong with the need to be different. Personality
and Social Psychology Review, 8, 248 –264.
Huckfeldt, R., & Sprague, J. (2000). Political consequences of inconsistency: The accessibility and stability of abortion attitudes. Political
Psychology, 21, 57–79.
Judd, C. M., & Johnson, J. T. (1981). Attitudes, polarization, and diagnosticity: Exploring the effect of affect. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 41, 26 –36.
Krosnick, J. A., Boninger, D. S., Chuang, Y. C., Berent, M. K., & Carnot,
C. G. (1993). Attitude strength: One construct or many related constructs? Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 65, 1132–1151.
Levine, J. M. (1989). Reactions to opinion deviance in small groups. In
P. B. Paulus (Ed.), The psychology of group influence (pp. 187–231).
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Levine, J. M., & Ranelli, C. J. (1978). Majority reaction to shifting and
stable attitudinal deviates. European Journal of Social Psychology, 8,
55–70.
Lynn, M., & Snyder, C. R. (2002). Uniqueness theory. In C. R. Snyder &
S. J. Lopez (Eds.), Handbook of positive psychology (pp. 395– 410).
New York: Oxford University Press.
Marques, J. M., Abrams, D., Paez, D., & Martinez-Taboada, C. (1998). The
role of categorization and in-group norms in judgments of groups and
their members. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 75, 976 –
988.
Marques, J. M., Abrams, D., & Serodio, R. G. (2001). Being better by

being right: Subjective group dynamics and derogation of in-group
deviants when generic norms are undermined. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 81, 436 – 447.
Marques, J. M., & Paez, D. (1994). The “black sheep effect”: Social
categorization, rejection of ingroup deviants, and perception of group
variability. In W. Stroebe & M. Hewstone (Eds.), European Review of
Social Psychology (Vol. 5, pp. 37– 68). Chichester, United Kingdom:
Wiley.
Matz, D. C., & Wood, W. (2005). Cognitive dissonance in groups: The
consequences of disagreement. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 88, 22–37.
Miller, D. T., & McFarland, C. (1987). Pluralistic ignorance: When similarity is interpreted as dissimilarity. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 53, 298 –305.
Myers, D. G. (1978). Polarizing effects of social comparison. Journal of
Experimental Social Psychology, 14, 554 –563.
Myers, D. G., Wojcicki, S. B., & Aardema, B. S. (1977). Attitude comparison: Is there ever a bandwagon effect? Journal of Applied Social
Psychology, 7, 341–347.
Nemeth, C., & Wachtler, J. (1983). Creative problem solving as a result of
majority versus minority influence. European Journal of Social Psychology, 4, 53– 64.
Nisbett, R. E., & Kunda, Z. (1985). Perception of social distributions.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 48, 297–311.
Noelle-Neumann, E. (1984). The spiral of silence (pp. 1–57). Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Paicheler, G. (1976). Norms and attitude change I: Polarization and styles
of behavior. European Journal of Social Psychology, 6, 405– 427.
Prentice, D. A., & Miller, D. T. (1996). Pluralistic ignorance and the
perpetuation of social norms by unwitting actors. In M. P. Zanna (Ed.),
Advances in Experimental Social Psychology (Vol. 29, pp. 161–209).
San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Tracy, J. L., & Robins, R. W. (2007). The psychological structure of pride:
A tale of two facets. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 92,
506 –525.
Vignoles, V. L., Chryssochoou, X., & Breakwell, G. M. (2000). The
distinctiveness principle: Identity, meaning, and the bounds of cultural
relativity. Personality and Social Psychology Review, 4, 337–354.

Received February 13, 2007
Revision received August 28, 2007
Accepted September 8, 2007 䡲

