ATTITUDES AND SOCIAL COGNITION

Dynamics of Self-Regulation: How (Un)accomplished Goal Actions Affect
Motivation
Minjung Koo and Ayelet Fishbach

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

University of Chicago
Two factors increase the motivation to adhere to a goal: goal commitment and lack of goal progress.
When people ask about commitment, focusing on what they have accomplished (to date) signals to them
high commitment and increases motivation. Conversely, when commitment is certain and people ask
about goal progress, focusing on what they have yet to accomplish (to go) signals to them lack of progress
and increases motivation. Accordingly, 4 studies show that emphasizing to-date information increases
goal adherence when commitment is uncertain—that is, when participants study for a relatively unimportant exam, consume luxuries, fulfill a desire, and make first-time contributions to a charity. Conversely, emphasizing to-go information increases goal adherence when commitment is certain—that is,
when participants study for an important exam, consume necessities, fulfill a need, and make repeated
contributions to a charity.
Keywords: goals, self-regulation, motivation, commitment, progress

To address this question, we adopt a goal framework (Aarts &
Dijksterhuis, 2000; Ferguson & Bargh, 2004; Förster, Liberman, &
Higgins, 2005; Gollwitzer & Moskowitz, 1996; Kruglanski et al.,
2002; Locke & Latham, 2002). In particular, we build on research
on dynamics of self-regulation, which distinguishes between selfregulation that is based on estimates of goal commitment and
highlighting and self-regulation that is based on estimates of lack
of progress and balancing (Fishbach & Dhar, 2005; Fishbach,
Dhar, & Zhang, 2006). We propose that when people evaluate their
level of commitment, focusing on what has been accomplished to
date signals that the goal is desirable and feasible more than does
focusing on what remains to be done and, thus, increases the
motivation to work on the goal that was partially attained. Conversely, when people evaluate their level of goal progress, focusing on what remains to be done signals lack of progress more than
does focusing on what has been accomplished to date and, thus,
increases the motivation to work on the goal that is partially not
attained. In what follows, we review the theoretical background for
these predictions, which we tested in four studies in which we
explored the effect of emphasizing to-date information versus
to-go information on self-regulation toward both personal and
social goals (e.g., study vs. making a pledge).

People often encourage themselves to work on a goal by considering either what they have accomplished (a to-date frame) or
what remains for them to do to attain the goal (a to-go frame). For
example, students increase their motivation to study by assessing
the amount of time and effort they have already invested in an
academic task or by assessing the amount of time and effort
required to complete the academic task. Similarly, athletes maintain their motivation to complete a long race by considering either
the completed distance or the remaining distance to the finish line.
In addition, social agents, organizations, and educators provide
information about what has been accomplished to date versus what
has yet to be accomplished, to motivate others to act on shared
social goals. For example, fundraisers present information about
either the amount of donations that they have received thus far
(i.e., seed money) or the amount that is missing, to complete a
charity campaign goal. Whereas emphasizing actions in to-date
and to-go frames is common, in this article we examine how such
variations in the emphasis affect motivation. For example, when
does information about the amount of money donated thus far
versus the amount required to complete a campaign goal increase
the likelihood of making a pledge?
The first and second authors contributed equally. This work was supported by the FMC Faculty Research Fund at the Graduate School of
Business, University of Chicago award to Ayelet Fishbach.
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Minjung
Koo, Graduate School of Business, University of Chicago, 5807 South
Woodlawn Avenue, Chicago, IL 60637, or to Ayelet Fishbach, Graduate
School of Business, University of Chicago, 5807 South Woodlawn Avenue, Chicago, IL 60637. E-mail: mkoo@chicagogsb.edu or
ayelet.fishbach@chicagogsb.edu

Effects of To-Date and To-Go Information
In the course of self-regulation toward abstract, ongoing goals
(e.g., to be generous, educated, healthy), people often set a specific
end state with a discrete completion point, which then facilitates
their choices of actions toward that end state (Ajzen, 1985; Gollwitzer, 1999; Locke & Latham, 2002). For example, dieters set
specific end states, such as losing 10 pounds, and students set end

Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 2008, Vol. 94, No. 2, 183–195
Copyright 2008 by the American Psychological Association 0022-3514/08/$12.00
DOI: 10.1037/0022-3514.94.2.183

183

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

184

KOO AND FISHBACH

states, such as studying for a specific exam. When pursuing these
goals, people consider two questions: one refers to goal commitment and to whether the goal is worth pursuing, and the other
refers to the level of goal progress and to the remaining distance to
goal attainment.
Research on the dynamics of self-regulation (Fishbach & Dhar,
2005; Fishbach et al., 2006) has demonstrated that whether people
ask about commitment or about progress determines the course of
self-regulation over time. When people ask about goal commitment, the strength of their motivation is defined by the product of
the perceived value of the goal and the likelihood of goal attainment (i.e., Value ⫻ Expectancy; Feather, 1982; Lewin, Dembo,
Festinger, & Sears, 1944; Tolman, 1955; Vroom, 1964). Completed goal-related actions are, then, a sign of a high level of
commitment, and they motivate a congruent choice of actions
through a dynamic of highlighting the pursuit of the partially
accomplished goal and prioritizing it over other goals. In addition,
if a person’s motivation is based on perceived goal commitment
and highlighting, the focus on what has not been accomplished (a
to-go frame) is a sign of low commitment, which undermines the
motivation to adhere to the goal. For example, the focus on
completed (vs. uncompleted) coursework motivates students to
study more when focus on completed coursework is a sign of
greater commitment to academic pursuits, whereas the focus on
uncompleted coursework signals low commitment and reduces the
motivation to study.
In a demonstration of commitment frame, prior research has
shown that people learn about their underlying goals by observing
their own behavior (e.g., Aronson, 1997; Bem, 1972; Cialdini,
Trost, & Newsom, 1995; Freedman & Fraser, 1966), which results
in a preference for actions that resemble previous ones in serving
the same underlying goals (Cooper & Fazio, 1984; Festinger,
1957). A tendency to adhere to a course of actions because of an
initial investment of efforts in a similar course of actions (i.e.,
highlighting) is sometimes portrayed as a sunk-cost fallacy (Arkes
& Ayton, 1999; Arkes & Blumer, 1985). However, this fallacy
illustrates a basic principle in self-regulation; namely, goal-related
actions increase commitment to the goal and motivate congruent
actions.
However, at other times, people ask about their level of goal
progress, and the strength of their motivation is a function of the
size of the discrepancy between their current state and their goal
attainment (Carver & Scheier, 1998; Higgins, 1987; Locke &
Latham, 2002). When motivation is based on a discrepancy or on
a lack of goal progress, the focus on what remains to be done is a
sign of low progress, which increases the motivation to adhere to
a goal through a dynamic of balancing. When people balance
between goal actions, they plan to pursue a goal because they have
not invested in it as much as they should, and they disengage from
a goal in which they have invested. Thus, whereas the focus on
what remains to be done is motivating, the focus on what has been
accomplished to date should undermine a person’s motivation
because it signals sufficient progress (e.g., Monin & Miller, 2001).
For example, the focus on incomplete coursework motivates studying more than does the focus on completed coursework, when the
focus on incomplete coursework signals insufficient progress.
Congruent with a progress frame of self-regulation, cybernetic
theories have portrayed the process of self-regulation as oriented
toward reducing the discrepancy between the present, actual state

and the desired end state (Bandura, 1991; Carver & Scheier, 1998;
Higgins, 1987; Locke & Latham, 1990; Miller, Galanter, & Pribram, 1960). For example, Carver and Scheier (1990, 1998) found
that the remaining distance to a desired end state motivates behavior toward the attainment of the end state, and research on selfdiscrepancy theory (Higgins, 1987) and regulatory focus theory
(Higgins, 1997) has further attested that discrepancies in different
types of goals cue distinctive actions by which one attempts to
achieve these different end states. In addition, research on goal
setting (Locke & Latham, 1990) has found that people set specific
goal end states (i.e., standards) for themselves and for others to
motivate actions that reduce the distance to goal attainment. What
is common in these lines of research is the assumption that perceived lack of progress is motivating.
In summary, there are two types of evidence in goal pursuit—
what has been accomplished to date and what remains to be done
to reach the end state—and these types of evidence have opposite
implications for commitment-based versus progress-based selfregulation. In a commitment frame, people adhere to a goal because they have partially accomplished it (highlighting), whereas
in a progress frame, people adhere to a goal because they have yet
to accomplish it (balancing).

Commitment Certainty
What, then, determines whether a person’s motivation is based
on perceived goal commitment and highlighting the pursuit of a
goal or on perceived lack of progress and balancing between goal
actions? We propose that people ask about goal commitment only
if their commitment is somewhat ambiguous—that is, if commitment is uncertain or is relatively low. When people feel unsure
about their level of goal commitment, their primary concern is to
evaluate whether the goal is important and worth pursuing further,
and they infer higher commitment on the basis of accomplishments
to date. As a result, emphasizing to-date information should be
more motivating than emphasizing to-go information. For example, perceived goal commitment influences the decision whether to
donate money to a novel (vs. familiar) charity or whether to study
for a moderately (vs. highly) important course. In these situations,
emphasizing the amount of money that has been donated to date
(vs. how much is needed to meet the campaign goal) or the amount
of completed (vs. remaining) coursework would be more motivating.
In contrast, people ask about goal progress when they are certain
about their commitment to a goal that is unambiguously important;
then, their motivation is based on inferences of lack of progress
(see also Brunstein & Gollwitzer, 1996; Wicklund & Gollwitzer,
1982). As such, emphasizing to-go information is more motivating
than emphasizing to-date information. For example, lack of
progress should be motivating when people are deciding whether
to donate money to a familiar and valuable charity or when they
are studying for a highly (vs. moderately) important course. In
these situations, the focus on the amount of money that is needed
to reach a campaign goal and the remaining work to complete a
course would be more motivating than would information about
accomplishments.
It is important to note that in the pursuit of a goal with a clear
end state, any accomplishment (e.g., 50% to date) can be framed as
a lack of accomplishment (e.g., 50% to go). We propose that the

(UN)ACCOMPLISHED GOAL ACTIONS

effect of this framing manipulation would depend on a person’s
commitment certainty; that is, a 50% to-date frame would increase
motivation when people are not certain about their commitment to
the goal and when they ponder the value of the goal and the
attainment expectancy, whereas a 50% to-go frame would be more
motivating when people ask whether more progress is needed to
attain the goal.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Self-Regulation Toward Personal Goals Versus Social
Goals
People often choose to focus on their own actions toward a
personal goal versus actions that remain to be done to attain the
goal. For example, marathon runners consider the distance completed versus the distance remaining to complete the race. Other
times, people encounter similar information about the progress that
their social group is making toward a common goal (e.g., the group
has accomplished 50% to date or has 50% to go). Moreover, to
motivate action, social agents choose to provide information on
what a social group of similar others has already accomplished or
has yet to do. For example, fundraisers present information about
the amount of donations they have received thus far (i.e., seed
money) from similar others versus the amount that is still required
to complete the fundraising goal.
We predict that when choosing to work on a social goal, people
rely on the same information as when they choose to work on a
personal goal. Specifically, they want to evaluate whether the
social goal is worth supporting or whether the goal is progressing.
They then infer high goal commitment on the basis of others’
actions to date (i.e., present contribution) versus others’ actions to
go (i.e., lack of contribution), and they infer lack of goal progress
on the basis of others’ remaining actions to go versus others’
completed actions to date. For example, people make pledges to a
charity organization because others have previously made pledges,
and thus they infer that the cause is important, or because others
have not yet made their pledges, and thus the goal is far from
completion. In line with the aforementioned analysis, we propose
that information about others’ contributions would increase motivation among uncommitted people, whereas information about
others’ lack of contributions would increase motivation among
committed people. In general, we propose that to the extent people
identify themselves with a social group (e.g., Brewer, 2003), the
processes of adhering to personal and social goals are similar, and
depending on a person’s level of goal commitment certainty,
emphasizing to-date information versus to-go information can
have different effects on the motivation to adhere to a goal.

Overview of Research
In four studies, we tested how the focus on either the accumulated amount of progress (a to-date frame) or the remaining
amount of progress (a to-go frame) influences the motivation to
adhere to a goal. We hypothesized that emphasizing to-date information increases goal adherence when commitment is uncertain
because this emphasis signals greater commitment. In contrast,
emphasizing to-go information increases motivation when commitment is certain because this emphasis signals lack of progress.
In these studies, we held the amount of actual progress constant
(approximately 50%) and manipulated the focus on actions to date

185

versus actions to go and commitment certainty. In Study 1, we
examined whether the focus on completed (vs. uncompleted)
coursework increased student participants’ motivation to study for
an elective (vs. core) course exam and whether inferences of
commitment mediated the effect on studying for the elective
(rather than the core) course exam to which commitment is uncertain. Using the context of loyalty programs, in Study 2, we then
examined whether the focus on completed (vs. uncompleted) purchases increases the motivation to use a frequent-buyer card that
offers luxury (vs. necessity) rewards and whether inferences of
progress mediate the effect on using the card that offers necessity
rewards, to which commitment is certain, but not the effect on
using the card that offers luxury rewards. In Study 3, we tested
whether the focus on accumulating progress to date (vs. to go)
increases the pursuit of a social goal that is framed as a desire (vs.
need). Study 4 was a field experiment involving an actual fundraising campaign; in it, we tested whether to-date-framed seed
money (i.e., how much has been donated) increases first-time
contributions to the charity and whether to-go-framed money (i.e.,
how much is needed to achieve the donation goal) increases
repeated contributions.

Study 1: Academic Goals
In Study 1, we examined how the relative focus on completed
actions versus remaining actions influences the motivation to work
on a goal. Undergraduate student participants assigned study time
either to a core-course exam, to which their commitment is certain
and relatively high, or to an elective-course exam, to which their
commitment is uncertain and relatively low, after learning that
they had covered (vs. had not yet covered) half the exam materials.
We predicted that for an elective-course exam, emphasizing the
progress to date (vs. to go) would increase the motivation to study,
whereas for a core-course exam, emphasizing the remaining
progress to go (vs. to date) would increase the motivation to study.

Method
Participants. Participants were 92 University of Chicago undergraduate students (30 men, 62 women) who participated in the
experiment for monetary compensation. The gender of participants
did not yield any effects here or in subsequent studies; therefore,
we omit gender from further consideration.
Procedure. This study had a 2 (course: core vs. elective) ⫻ 2
(focus: to date vs. to go) between-subjects design. Participants
completed a survey on academic goals. The first part of the survey
asked all participants to consider a scenario in which they have two
exams scheduled on the same day, a week from the present date,
for different classes. Participants read that one exam was for a core
course for which they would want to earn the best grade possible,
whereas the other exam was for an elective course that they were
taking pass/fail. These instructions emphasized the certain and
relatively high commitment to the core-course (vs. elective-course)
exam. The rest of the survey referred to only one of these exams,
depending on the experimental condition.
To allow us to manipulate the focus on completed actions versus
remaining actions, the survey included a chart representing the
amount of materials that participants had presumably already
covered (a to-date frame) or that they had yet to cover (a to-go

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

KOO AND FISHBACH

frame) for their exam. The chart consisted of a bar containing an
arrow. The bar represented the total amount of work toward goal
attainment (100%), and the arrow represented the current level of
performance, which was held at 48% across all conditions. We
purposely chose a number close to the midpoint but different from
50%, which we assumed would be too easy for participants to
reverse in their minds (e.g., framing 50% to date as 50% to go). By
choosing a number close to the midpoint, we further controlled for
a possible systematic difference in motivation as a function of
emphasizing small and large areas. For example, 20% to go and
80% to date vary not only by focus but also by the size of the
emphasized area.
In the to-date condition, the arrow was colored from the starting
point (0%) to the current level of progress (48%), and participants
read that the arrow described the amount of materials they had
already covered for their exam. In the to-go condition, the arrow
was colored from the current level of performance (48%) to the
end point (100%), and participants read that the arrow described
the amount of materials they had yet to study for their exam.
Next, to measure motivation to study for the exam, participants
indicated the amount of time they would spend studying for the
exam (up to 20 hr) and the amount of effort they would put into
studying (7-point scale; 1 ⫽ not at all, 7 ⫽ very much). To assess
the effect of the manipulation on participants’ level of commitment, we asked them to further rate the importance of studying for
the exam (7-point scale; 1 ⫽ not important at all, 7 ⫽ very
important). Upon completion of the survey, participants were
debriefed and dismissed by the experimenter.

Results and Discussion
The studying times participants listed were positively skewed;
therefore, we log transformed them using natural log transformation (values ⬎ 0). We then created an index of motivation to study
by collapsing standardized time and effort measures into a motivation index (r ⫽ .74, p ⬍ .001). A Course ⫻ Focus analysis of
variance (ANOVA) of this index yielded a main effect for course,
F(1, 88) ⫽ 275.55, p ⬍ .001, indicating greater motivation to study
for the core-course exam (M ⫽ 0.83) than for the elective-course
exam (M ⫽ – 0.77). This main effect is consistent with the commitment manipulation, indicating that participants’ commitment to
the core-course exam was greater than their commitment to the
elective-course exam. There was no main effect for focus (F ⬍ 1).
In support of the hypothesis, the ANOVA yielded the predicted
Course ⫻ Focus interaction, F(1, 88) ⫽ 10.78, p ⬍ .01 (see Figure
1). Planned contrasts revealed that, for the elective-course exam
(uncertain commitment), to-date information increased the motivation to study (M ⫽ – 0.58) more than did to-go information (M ⫽
– 0.97), t(46) ⫽ 2.49, p ⬍ .05. However, for the core-course exam
(certain commitment), to-go information increased motivation to
study (M ⫽ 0.96) more than did to-date information (M ⫽ 0.71),
t(42) ⫽ –2.26, p ⬍ .05. We obtained similar patterns of interaction
for each dependent variable separately: for time spent studying,
F(1, 88) ⫽ 7.11, p ⬍ .01; and for effort investment, F(1, 88) ⫽
6.25, p ⬍ .05.
We posited that emphasizing completed coursework versus remaining coursework increases participants’ motivation to study for
the elective-course exam by signaling that studying is important.
When the commitment to study is already high and certain (i.e.,

To-Date

To-Go

1.5
1

Motivation

186

0.5
0
-0.5
-1
-1.5

Core Course

Elective Course

Figure 1. Motivation to study (Z score) as a function of commitment
(certain: core; uncertain: elective) and focus on to-date information versus
to-go information (Study 1).

core exam), students do not infer importance from completed
coursework; therefore, the focus on to-date versus to-go information should not influence perceived importance. To explore this
hypothesis, we analyzed the importance ratings. A Course ⫻
Focus ANOVA of importance ratings yielded a main effect for
course, F(1, 88) ⫽ 165.08, p ⬍ .001, and a main effect for focus,
F(1, 88) ⫽ 4.24, p ⬍ .05. In support of the manipulation, participants indicated that studying for the core-course exam was more
important (M ⫽ 6.09) than studying for the elective-course exam
(M ⫽ 3.65). In addition, to-date information increased perceived
importance (M ⫽ 5.04) more than did to-go information (M ⫽
4.58), though the latter effect was qualified by the interaction. In
support of the hypothesis, the ANOVA yielded the predicted
Course ⫻ Focus interaction, F(1, 88) ⫽ 4.42, p ⬍ .05. Planned
contrasts revealed that, in the elective-course exam (uncertain
commitment), to-date information increased the perceived importance of the exam (M ⫽ 4.04) more than did to-go information
(M ⫽ 3.25), t(46) ⫽ 2.70, p ⬍ .05. However, for the core-course
exam (certain commitment), to-date (M ⫽ 6.09) and to-go (M ⫽
6.10) information yielded similar importance ratings (t ⬍ 1). Thus,
the relative emphasis on to-date (vs. to-go) information increases
the value of studying and, subsequently, increases commitment
only when initial commitment is uncertain and relatively low
(elective course).
The increase in subjective importance when one considers completed (vs. remaining) coursework should further mediate the
effect on motivation to study for the elective-course exam but not
the effect on motivation to study for the core-course exam. A series
of regression analyses supports this prediction. Beginning with the
elective-course exam, the focus on to-date information versus
to-go information directly increased the motivation to study (␤ ⫽
.35), t(46) ⫽ 2.49, p ⬍ .05. In addition, the focus on to-date
information versus to-go information increased perceived importance (␤ ⫽ .37), t(46) ⫽ 2.70, p ⬍ .05, which in turn increased the
motivation to study (␤ ⫽ .49), t(46) ⫽ 3.76, p ⬍ .01. When
controlling for importance ratings, the path between the focus on
to-date information versus to-go information and the motivation to
study became nonsignificant (␤ ⫽ .19), t(45) ⫽ 1.40, p ⬎ .15. The

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

(UN)ACCOMPLISHED GOAL ACTIONS

Sobel test statistic indicated that the reduction of the focus effect
on motivation was significant (z ⫽ 2.02, p ⬍ .05; see Figure 2).
A similar analysis conducted in the core-course condition revealed that changes in perceived importance, as a result of the
manipulation, did not mediate the effect on motivation to study.
Specifically, the focus on to-date information versus to-go information directly decreased the motivation to study (␤ ⫽ –.33),
t(42) ⫽ –2.26, p ⬍ .05. In addition, the focus on to-date information versus to-go information did not affect perceived importance
(␤ ⫽ –.01), t(42) ⬍ 1, though perceived importance increased the
motivation to study (␤ ⫽ .33), t(42) ⫽ 2.23, p ⬍ .05. When
controlling for importance ratings, the path between the focus on
to-date information versus to-go information and on motivation to
study remained significant (␤ ⫽ –.33), t(41) ⫽ –2.37, p ⬍ .05,
suggesting that, as we expected, the effect of focus on motivation
is independent of perceived importance.
The results of the mediation suggest that, regardless of the exam
(core vs. elective course), importance ratings, which correspond to
commitment, predict motivation to study. However, in support of
our hypothesis, only in the elective-course condition did participants infer importance on the basis of completed coursework,
which in turn increased their motivation to study. In the corecourse condition, participants did not use the information about
their completed (vs. remaining) coursework to infer their level of
commitment, as demonstrated by the null effect on importance
ratings.
Study 1 provides initial evidence for our hypothesis that emphasizing completed actions versus remaining actions increases
the motivation to adhere to a goal when commitment is uncertain,
by signaling that the goal is important. We found that to-date (vs.
to-go) information increased the motivation to study for a course to
which participants were less committed. These participants followed a dynamic of highlighting; that is, they chose to study
because they had already completed some coursework. In contrast,
to-go (vs. to-date) information increased the motivation to study
for a course to which participants were highly committed. They
followed a dynamic of balancing; that is, they chose to study
because they had remaining coursework that they had not yet
completed.

187

In Study 2, we further tested whether the focus on to-go (vs.
to-date) information increases motivation when commitment is
certain by signaling lack of goal progress. Thus, in Study 1, we
demonstrated that perceived importance mediated the effect on
motivation when commitment was uncertain, whereas in Study 2,
we attempted to demonstrate that expected progress mediates the
effect on motivation when commitment is certain. To strengthen
the external validity of our findings, in Study 2, we further manipulated the focus on completed actions versus remaining actions
in the context of a loyalty program. Loyalty (frequency) programs
fit within our framework because they require people to keep
investing their resources (e.g., money, time, effort) to reach the end
state of receiving a reward; therefore, people’s attention is naturally drawn to what has been (vs. has yet to be) accomplished to
complete the program and receive the reward.

Study 2: Loyalty Programs
To examine whether the focus on completed versus remaining
actions affects the motivation to participate in a loyalty program,
we provided participants with a typical frequent-buyer card that
emphasized either completed purchases or remaining purchases to
receive a reward. We further manipulated the nature of the reward:
a necessity versus a luxury. Buying luxury items is difficult to
justify (e.g., Prelec & Loewenstein, 1998; Thaler, 1980); therefore,
people’s commitment is uncertain and relatively low. In turn,
focusing on completed purchases may deliver information about
the importance of investing resources toward the luxury reward. In
contrast, people do not need to justify the consumption of necessities, for which commitment is already certain and high. Therefore, the focus on remaining purchases, which emphasizes the
absence of progress, should increase the motivation to invest
resources toward the necessity reward.
Participants in this study were University of Chicago undergraduate students, who indicated their motivation to use a university
bookstore frequent-buyer card that offered luxury or necessity
rewards. We manipulated the focus on to-date information versus
to-go information by presenting a card on which a stamp is added
for each purchase (i.e., the visual focus is on the number of
completed slots) versus a card on which a stamp is removed for
each purchase (i.e., the visual focus is on the number of remaining
slots). We predicted that, when participants expected to earn
luxury rewards, those in the to-date condition would express
greater motivation to use the bookstore card but that, when they
expected to earn necessity rewards, those in the to-go condition
would express greater motivation to use the card.

Method

Figure 2. Path model of the influence of to-date information versus to-go
information on perceived importance and motivation to study for an
elective-course exam (Study 1). Numbers not in parentheses are standardized betas. Numbers in parentheses are zero-order standardized betas. *p ⬍
.05; **p ⬍ .01.

Participants. The participants were 92 University of Chicago
undergraduate students (50 men, 42 women) who participated in
the study for monetary compensation.
Procedure. This study had a 2 (reward type: necessities vs.
luxuries) ⫻ 2 (focus: to date vs. to go) between-subjects design.
Participants read a scenario in which the university bookstore was
offering a rewards program for which participants needed to have
a frequent-bookstore-patron card to participate. Using this card,
they could earn a $50 gift certificate after making 12 purchases of
$50 each. A gift certificate for University of Chicago merchandise

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

KOO AND FISHBACH

was used as a luxury reward, and a gift certificate for textbooks
was used as a necessity reward. In the necessities condition,
participants read that the gift certificate “may be used for the
purchase of textbooks,” whereas in the luxuries condition, participants read that it “may be used to purchase University of Chicago
merchandise (e.g., sweatshirts and mugs with a University of
Chicago logo).”
Participants then read that a friend who recently graduated left
them a frequent-bookstore-patron card. They were handed an
actual card. In the to-date condition, the card had six book-shaped
stamps printed on 6 of 12 slots; thus, participants’ visual attention
was drawn to the completed slots. Participants read that they would
fill 1 slot per $50 purchase. In the to-go condition, 6 of 12
preexisting book-shaped slots were punched; thus, participants’
visual attention was drawn to the remaining slots to receive the
reward. Participants read that 1 slot is removed from the card per
$50 purchase.
Next, participants rated their interest in using the bookstore card
(7-point scale; 1 ⫽ not likely, 7 ⫽ certainly). In addition, to
measure expected goal progress, participants rated the extent to
which filling one slot (in the to-date condition) or removing one
slot (in the to-go condition) would make them feel that they were
making progress toward the reward (1 ⫽ not at all, 7 ⫽ very
much). As a manipulation check, participants rated the attractiveness of the reward program (1 ⫽ not at all attractive, 7 ⫽ very
much attractive). Upon completion of the survey, the participants
were debriefed and dismissed by the experimenter.

Results and Discussion
In support of the manipulation, a Type ⫻ Focus ANOVA of
attractiveness of the reward program yielded a main effect for the
reward type, F(1, 88) ⫽ 8.48, p ⬍ .01, indicating that necessity
rewards (textbooks; M ⫽ 4.41) were more attractive than were
luxury rewards (University of Chicago merchandise; M ⫽ 3.49).
There was no main effect for focus, F(1, 88) ⫽ 2.03, ns, nor was
there an interaction effect, F(1, 88) ⫽ 1.15, ns. Notably, although
attractiveness does not correspond to commitment certainty, part
of the reason that participants were more committed to enroll in a
program that offered necessity (vs. luxury) rewards is that these
rewards were viewed as more attractive.
Next, a Type ⫻ Focus ANOVA of participants’ interest in
joining the reward program (using the bookstore card) yielded no
main effects for reward type and focus (Fs ⬍ 1). In support of the
hypothesis, the ANOVA yielded the predicted reward Type ⫻
Focus interaction, F(1, 88) ⫽ 12.20, p ⬍ .01 (see Figure 3).
Planned contrasts revealed that participants were more interested
in joining the program that offered luxury rewards in the to-date
condition (M ⫽ 5.00) than in the to-go condition (M ⫽ 3.71),
t(43) ⫽ 2.54, p ⬍ .05. However, they were more interested in
joining the program that offered necessity rewards in the to-go
condition (M ⫽ 5.26) than in the to-date condition (M ⫽ 4.00),
t(45) ⫽ –2.41, p ⬍ .05.
We posited that completed purchases increase commitment toward earning luxury rewards, but when commitment is certain, as
in the case of necessity rewards, remaining purchases increase a
person’s sense of lack of progress toward earning the necessity
rewards. If the pursuit of necessities is driven by perceived lack of
progress, we would further expect that a single purchase would

To-Date

To-Go

5.5
5

Motivation

188

4.5
4
3.5
3
2.5
2

Necessity

Luxury

Figure 3. Motivation to join a reward program as a function of reward
type (necessity vs. luxury) and focus on to-date information versus to-go
information (Study 2).

signal more progress when it is framed as working toward remaining purchases than when it is framed as adding to completed
purchases. To explore this hypothesis, we analyzed the expected
progress ratings as a function of reward Type ⫻ Focus. An
ANOVA of these ratings yielded a main effect of focus, F(1, 87) ⫽
6.39, p ⬍ .05, and no main effect of reward type (F ⬍ 1). That is,
participants in the to-go condition indicated that each purchase
would make them feel that they were making more progress (M ⫽
3.72) than did participants in the to-date condition (M ⫽ 2.96),
though this main effect was qualified by the predicted reward
Type ⫻ Focus interaction, F(1, 87) ⫽ 6.39, p ⬍ .05. Planned
contrasts revealed that, in the program that offered necessity rewards, participants in the to-go condition expected to make more
progress with each purchase (M ⫽ 4.14) than did participants in
the to-date condition (M ⫽ 2.63), t(44) ⫽ –3.89, p ⬍ .01. However, in the program that offered luxury rewards, participants in the
to-go (M ⫽ 3.33) and to-date (M ⫽ 3.32) conditions expected
similar amounts of progress (t ⬍ 1). Thus, emphasizing the remaining purchases to go (vs. to date) increased participants’ beliefs
that each purchase would result in greater progress, but this was
only the case for necessity (vs. luxury) rewards.
A mediation analysis tested the effect of expected progress on
the motivation to work toward earning the reward. Beginning with
the program that offered necessity rewards, the focus on to-go
information versus to-date information directly increased participants’ motivation to use the card (␤ ⫽ .34), t(45) ⫽ 2.41, p ⬍ .05.
In addition, the focus on to-go information versus to-date information increased participants’ expected progress (␤ ⫽ .51),
t(44) ⫽ 3.89, p ⬍ .01, which in turn increased their motivation to
use the card (␤ ⫽ .35), t(43) ⫽ 2.48, p ⬍ .05. When we controlled
for progress ratings, the path between the focus on to-go information versus to-date information and on motivation to use the card
became nonsignificant (␤ ⫽ .15), t(43) ⬍ 1. The Sobel test statistic
indicated that the reduction of the focus effect on motivation was
marginally significant (z ⫽ 1.84, p ⫽ .06; see Figure 4).
A similar analysis conducted on the luxury rewards revealed
that the focus on to-go information versus to-date information
directly decreased motivation to use the card (␤ ⫽ –.36), t(43) ⫽
–2.54, p ⬍ .05. However, the focus on to-go information versus
to-date information did not affect expected progress (␤ ⫽ .00, ns),

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

(UN)ACCOMPLISHED GOAL ACTIONS

Figure 4. Path model of the influence of to-go information versus to-date
information on expected progress and motivation to work toward necessity
rewards (Study 2). Numbers not in parentheses are standardized betas.
Numbers in parentheses are zero-order standardized betas. *p ⬍ .05; **p ⬍
.01.

though expected progress increased motivation to use the card
(␤ ⫽ .35), t(43) ⫽ 2.48, p ⬍ .05. Most important, when we
controlled for progress ratings, the effect of to-go versus to-date
information on motivation to use the card remained significant
(␤ ⫽ –.36), t(42) ⫽ –2.71, p ⫽ .01, which suggests that the effect
of the focus manipulation on motivation to work toward luxury
rewards was independent of expected progress.
Overall, the mediation analyses demonstrate that only when
pursuing necessities (vs. luxuries) did participants expect to make
more progress with each purchase when it was framed as purchases remaining versus purchases completed. In turn, these expectations increased their motivation to enroll in the program that
offered necessity (vs. luxury) rewards—that is, when commitment
was certain and high.
The results of Study 2 extend our previous results by suggesting
that the focus on completed purchases increases the motivation to
work toward earning luxury rewards, whereas the focus on remaining purchases increases the motivation to work toward earning
necessity rewards. In addition, only the pursuit of necessities (vs.
luxuries) was driven by inferences of expected progress. We find
this pattern in a context in which the initial progress on a goal was
made by another person and was inherited by the participant; thus,
there was no experimental demand to adhere to the goal in order to
justify one’s past actions (i.e., reduce dissonance).
Overall, Studies 1 and 2 support our hypothesis that completed
and remaining actions provide information on commitment or on
progress, depending on what people ask. In Studies 3 and 4, we
tested people’s motivation to invest in social goals, which are
defined as goals that require joint efforts by a group of individuals
(e.g., charitable fundraising). We predicted that similar factors
(lack of progress, the presence of commitment) would affect
people’s motivation to invest in a social goal, depending on their
commitment certainty, and that these factors would have opposite
implications for when completed actions versus remaining actions
would increase goal adherence.

Study 3: Showing School Spirit
In Study 3, we examined participants’ motivation to support
their university by purchasing university merchandise. Participants

189

read that their university set a goal of having 100% of the students
purchase at least one item of university merchandise (e.g., a mug
with the university logo) to express their support. Participants then
indicated their motivation to purchase such an item as a function of
the proportion of students who supposedly already own or do not
yet own university merchandise and by the framing of such purchase as a need or a desire.
It is notable that unlike Study 2, in which different sets of items
were used for luxury rewards versus necessity rewards, in Study 3,
a single category of items (equivalent to luxuries in Study 2) was
used and the commitment to purchase was manipulated by asking
participants to list reasons they may want to purchase versus need
to purchase university merchandise. We assumed that needs (like
necessities) must be fulfilled; therefore, a person’s commitment to
purchase is certain and high. Conversely, people’s desires (like
luxuries) do not have to be fulfilled; therefore, a person’s commitment is uncertain and relatively low. Accordingly, information
about other people who have not yet purchased university merchandise should motivate the purchase of merchandise that is
framed as needed, whereas information about others who have
already purchased university merchandise should motivate the
purchase of merchandise that is framed as desired.

Method
Participants. The participants were 77 University of Chicago
undergraduate students (44 men, 33 women) who participated in
the study for monetary compensation.
Procedure. This study had a 2 (motivation: desire vs. need) ⫻
2 (focus: to date vs. to go) between-subjects design. Participants
completed a survey titled “University Bookstore Survey,” which
consisted of two parts. The first part was an evaluation of University of Chicago merchandise (e.g., sweatshirts or mugs with the
university logo) available at the university bookstore. Participants
in the desire condition read that they should list three reasons they
may want to purchase University of Chicago merchandise to
express their support. They listed reasons such as, “I have school
pride,” and “It is on sale.” Participants in the need condition listed
three reasons they may need to purchase University of Chicago
merchandise. They listed reasons such as, “I need a souvenir for a
friend or family,” and “I need to show off my school pride.” All
the participants could easily list three reasons.
In the second part of the survey, participants read that the
University of Chicago set a goal of having 100% of the students
purchase University of Chicago merchandise. They further received information about the percentage of students that already
purchased (vs. not purchased) University of Chicago merchandise,
according to a recent survey that was (presumably) conducted by
the University of Chicago and that included responses from 342
present students.
In the to-date condition, participants read that 170 of 342 surveyed students indicated that they had already purchased University of Chicago merchandise. Participants were also shown a chart
similar to the one used in Study 1. The chart contained two bars:
one that represented the number of total respondents (342) and one
(on top of it) that represented the number of buyers (170); the top
bar covered approximately 50% of the left side of the bottom bar.
In the to-go condition, participants were told that 172 of 342
surveyed students indicated that they had not purchased University

KOO AND FISHBACH

of Chicago merchandise. Participants were also shown a chart in
which a bottom bar represented the number of total respondents
(342) and in which a top bar, which covered approximately 50% of
the right side of the bottom bar, represented the number of nonbuyers (172).
As a measure participants’ motivation to purchase University of
Chicago merchandise and to thus help the university meet the goal,
participants listed the amount of money they planned to spend on
University merchandise this year. Participants further rated the
likelihood of purchasing University of Chicago merchandise this
year (7-point scale; 1 ⫽ not likely, 7 ⫽ certainly). They were then
presented with a list of various University of Chicago merchandise
items (e.g., glassware and mugs, key chains and lanyards, sweatshirts) and were asked to mark the items they planned to buy. Upon
completion of the survey, the participants were debriefed and
dismissed by the experimenter.

Results and Discussion
The amounts of money participants listed were not normally
distributed; therefore, we log transformed the money measure
using natural log transformation, after adding 1 to each score to
include 0 values. We then created an index of purchase motivation
by collapsing the standardized measures of amount of money,
purchase intent, and number of items (␣ ⫽ .70). A Motivation ⫻
Focus ANOVA of this index yielded no main effects for motivation and focus (Fs ⬍ 1). In support of the hypothesis, this ANOVA
yielded the predicted Motivation ⫻ Focus interaction, F(1, 72) ⫽
11.22, p ⬍ .001 (see Figure 5). Planned contrast revealed that
when participants listed reasons that they desired to purchase,
those in the to-date condition indicated greater motivation to
purchase university merchandise (M ⫽ 0.37) than did those in the
to-go condition (M ⫽ – 0.13), t(39) ⫽ 2.25, p ⬍ .05. However,
when participants listed reasons they needed to purchase merchandise, participants in the to-go condition indicated greater motivation (M ⫽ 0.27) than did those in the to-date condition (M ⫽
– 0.33), t(33) ⫽ –2.48, p ⬍ .05. We obtained similar patterns of
interaction for each variable separately: for money, F(1, 73) ⫽
9.22, p ⬍ .01; for purchase intent, F(1, 73) ⫽ 5.63, p ⬍ .05; and
for the number of items, F(1, 72) ⫽ 6.17, p ⬍ .05.

To-Date

To-Go

0.5
0.4
0.3

Motivation

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

190

0.2
0.1
0
-0.1
-0.2
-0.3
-0.4

Need

These results extend our findings to the pursuit of desires versus
the pursuit of needs and when progress (or absence of progress) is
evaluated in relation to a social rather than a personal goal. We
found a greater motivation to pursue a desirable end state when
one considered others’ actions (vs. lack of actions) toward this goal
because others’ actions imply that the goal is valuable and that
one’s commitment is high. We further found a greater motivation
to pursue a need when one considered others’ lack of actions
because the absence of actions signals lack of goal progress.
Study 3 measured behavioral intentions. Thus, a study that tests
for actual goal adherence was still needed. Accordingly, in Study
4, we used a field experiment in the context of a charitable
fundraising. Previous research on charitable giving has shown that
an increase in the amount of contributions to a fundraising program (i.e., seed money) leads to an increase in the rate of subsequent contributions (Andreoni, 1989; List & Lucking-Reiley,
2002). Professional fundraisers also consider the role of seed
money; a recent manual for fundraisers recommends not starting
the public phase of a fundraising campaign until 40%–50% of the
goal is pledged as seed money (Fundraising School, 1999). However, fundraisers typically present seed money only in the form of
what has been accomplished to date relative to the campaign goal
but rarely present money in the form of how much the organization
needs to accomplish to achieve its goal. We predicted that to-date
framing versus to-go framing of seed money could increase contributions in different ways that fit different audiences. That is,
to-date-framed seed money would be more motivating than would
to-go-framed seed money for people who have never contributed
to the charity because it signaled that the goal of the charity was
valuable and feasible. In contrast, to-go-framed seed money would
be more motivating than to-date-framed seed money to people who
have made repeated contributions to the charity because it signaled
lack of progress on an already important goal.

Study 4: Charitable Fundraising
We conducted this field experiment with the cooperation of the
South Korean office of Compassion International. For research
purposes, we created a campaign that established a special fund to
support AIDS orphans. The solicited population included people
who provided their contact information but have not yet contributed to Compassion (i.e., the cold list) and regular donors, who
donated an average of $32 per month over the past year (i.e., the
hot list). They all learned that the campaign goal was to raise 10
million won (US$10,000) to help AIDS orphans in Africa and that
approximately half the money had already been raised through
various channels. Half the participants received a solicitation letter
that emphasized how much had been donated (a to-date frame),
and the other half received a letter that emphasized how much was
still required to achieve the campaign goal (a to-go frame). We
predicted that among potential donors from the cold list (uncertain
commitment), an emphasis on what has been accomplished would
increase donations, whereas among regular donors from the hot list
(certain commitment), an emphasis on what has yet to be accomplished to achieve the goal would increase donations.

Desire

Method
Figure 5. Motivation to purchase university merchandise (Z score) as a
function of framing (need vs. desire) and focus on to-date versus to-go
information (Study 3).

Participants. We included in the study 122 potential donors
(58 men, 64 women), who constituted the entire cold list of

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

(UN)ACCOMPLISHED GOAL ACTIONS

Compassion Korea, and randomly sampled 124 regular donors (54
men, 70 women) from the hot list (more than 3000 donors). The
participants were all from Korea. Their average age was 39 years
old (cold list, M ⫽ 40 years; hot list, M ⫽ 37 years), and their ages
ranged from 18 years old to 69 years old. Participants on the cold
list were people who indicated interest in Compassion and who
provided their names and addresses but who had not yet made a
single donation. The average donation period for regular donors
was 469 days (SD ⫽ 147 days) before the beginning of the study.
Procedure. This study had a 2 (commitment: cold list vs. hot
list) ⫻ 2 (focus: to date vs. to go) between-subjects design.
Participants received a solicitation letter from Compassion Korea
(see http://www.compassion.or.kr) that invited them to support
Compassion’s AIDS Initiative. Compassion is an international
Christian child sponsorship organization (see http://www.compassion.com) with offices in nine countries. Since 1952, Compassion
has provided support for children in Africa, Asia, Central and
South America, and the Caribbean. Most regular donors provide a
monthly gift that supports a child (or children) in one of these
countries. Recently, Compassion has established the AIDS Initiative, which solicits gifts for food, shelter, medicine, and basic care
for AIDS orphans.
As part of our study, Compassion Korea joined the AIDS
Initiative by sending a solicitation letter to potential donors (cold
list) and regular donors (hot list). The letter described the organization and the AIDS Initiative. It indicated the following (translated from Korean):
Every 14 seconds, somewhere in this world, a child is orphaned by the
AIDS virus. Every day, 14,000 children are infected by HIV and every
year 510,000 children die due to AIDS. It is expected that by 2010, 2.5
million children will become orphans due to AIDS. These statistics do
not even begin to depict the magnitude of the suffering that AIDS
orphans are enduring. Subsequent to the parents’ death, AIDS orphans
are ostracized by relatives and neighbors because of unfounded fears
of contracting the disease. Shunned by the community and with no
one to look after them, AIDS orphans cannot help but feel abandoned
by the world around them and by God. Compassion Korea hopes to
provide hope and dreams to these children who suffer under not only
the weight of poverty but also AIDS. Help us provide shelter and
solace to these children who have become exposed to this terrifying
pandemic.

The solicitation letter further indicated that
Compassion Korea’s special HIV/AIDS fund will provide children
with food, blankets, clothes, and shelter through a special program
tailored especially to their needs. Furthermore, the fund will help
provide badly needed medicine and treatment to families afflicted
with AIDS and will provide educational and spiritual support for those
most in need of a helping hand.

Finally, the letter indicated that the goal of Compassion Korea was
to raise 10 million won (approximately US$10,000) to help AIDS
orphans in Africa.
The content of the solicitation letter was similar across conditions, except for the information about goal progress. Participants
in the to-date condition read, “To this point, we have successfully
raised $4,920 through various channels.” Those in the to-go condition read, “We have successfully raised money through various
channels and need another $5,080.” As in previous studies, we

191

included a chart describing the campaign goal and the current level
of progress, which focused participants’ attention on to-date versus
to-go information (see Figure 6). The chart included a long bar
representing the campaign goal and, on top of it, an arrow representing the current level of progress. In the to-date condition, the
top arrow began at the starting point on the left and ended at the
current level of progress (50%). In the to-go condition, the top
arrow began at the current level of progress (50%) and ended at the
end point on the right ($10,000). We listed the campaign’s goal
($10,000) in the bars and listed the current level of progress or
remaining progress in the arrows ($5,080 vs. $4,920).
The last part of the letter invited participants to provide their
donations. Participants delivered their gifts directly to Compassion
Korea’s account. The letter was sent in February 2006, and donations were received until May 2006. Compassion delivered the
donations to support HIV/AIDS orphans in Uganda.

Results and Discussion
In total, 11.8% of the sample made contributions, raising
$5,322.45 (M ⫽ $21.63; SD ⫽ $173). We analyzed the frequency
of contribution and the average contribution as a function of
commitment (hot list vs. cold list) and focus (to date vs. to go).
Beginning with the frequency of contribution, we used logistic
regression to test the hypothesis. The dependent variable received
a value of 1 if the participant made a donation and a value of 0 if
otherwise. The independent variables included commitment (hot
list vs. cold list), focus (to date vs. to go), and the interaction
between commitment and focus. In support of our hypothesis, the
interaction between commitment and focus was statistically significant and was in the hypothesized direction (␤ ⫽ 3.39), Wald’s
␹2(1, N ⫽ 246) ⫽ 7.83, p ⬍ .01. Further analysis revealed that
from the hot list, 1.6% of the participants in the to-date condition
made a pledge, whereas 12.5% of the participants in the to-go
condition made a pledge, ␹2(1, N ⫽ 124) ⫽ 5.40, p ⬍ .05. In
contrast, from the cold list, 24.2% of the participants in the to-date
condition made a pledge, whereas 8.3% of the participants in the
to-go condition made a pledge, ␹2(1, N ⫽ 122) ⫽ 5.60, p ⬍ .05
(see Figure 7). It is notable that 100% of participants from the hot
list kept their regular monthly donations to Compassion during the
campaign period, and the presented statistics refer to their additional contributions to the new HIV/AIDS initiative.
The amount of contributions were not normally distributed;
therefore, we log transformed the contributions using natural log
transformation after adding 1 to each score to include 0 values. An
ANOVA yielded a main effect for commitment, F(1, 242) ⫽ 6.17,
p ⬍ .05, indicating a higher contribution rate among participants in
the cold list (M ⫽ 1.81) than among those in the hot list (M ⫽

(a) To-date condition

To Date: $4,920
Campaign Goal: $10,000
(b) To-go condition

To Go: $5,080
Campaign Goal: $10,000

Figure 6. Compassion solicitation letter figures (Study 4).

KOO AND FISHBACH

192
To-Date

To-Go

signed to information on what has been (vs. has yet to be) accomplished in their decision to pledge.

Frequency of Contribution

30%
25%

General Discussion

20%
15%
10%
5%
0%

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Cold List

Hot List

Figure 7. Charity contribution as a function of commitment certainty
(cold list vs. hot list) and focus on to-date versus to-go information
(Study 4).

0.73). Notably, we conducted this analysis only on the donations
made to the new HIV/AIDS initiative, and 100% of the hot-list
participants were regular child sponsors who also donated an
average of $96 during the campaign period ($32 per month over a
3-month period), which suggests that, despite this main effect, the
participants from the hot list donated more money to Compassion
overall. There was no main effect for focus (F ⬍ 1).
In support of the hypothesis, this ANOVA yielded the predicted
Commitment ⫻ Focus interaction, F(1, 242) ⫽ 10.47, p ⬍ .01.
Planned contrasts revealed that participants from the hot list (certain commitment) donated more money in the to-go condition
(M ⫽ 1.26) than did participants in the to-date condition (M ⫽
0.17), t(122) ⫽ –2.40, p ⬍ .05. However, participants from the
cold list (uncertain commitment) donated more money in the
to-date condition (M ⫽ 2.66) than did participants in the to-go
condition (M ⫽ 0.94), t(120) ⫽ 2.35, p ⬍ .05.
These results support our predictions in a real-world setting and
with regard to actual pledges that are made to a charity organization. Further analysis reveals that the presentation format increased
the average donation by more than 3 times (M ⫽ 0.55 vs. M ⫽
1.95, for low-motivation conditions [i.e., hot-list/to-date and coldlist/to-go conditions] versus high-motivation conditions [i.e., hotlist/to-go and cold-list/to-date conditions], respectively), t(244) ⫽
3.18, p ⬍ .01. Similarly, the presentation format increased the
likelihood of donating by more than 3 times (M ⫽ 5% vs. M ⫽
18%), ␹2(1, N ⫽ 246) ⫽ 10.38, p ⬍ .01.
It appears that information about others’ donations (vs. lack of
donations) increases pledges by people with uncertain commitment who want to evaluate the importance of making a pledge. In
addition, information about the lack of donations increases pledges
by people with certain commitment because it signals that the
campaign is not progressing quickly enough. We conclude that the
motivation to make a pledge is based on either perceived commitment (for uncommitted people) or perceived lack of progress (for
committed people). Notably, in this field study, we compared
members of two different groups (hot list vs. cold list), who could
vary on variables other than their group affiliation, though we
ensured that age and gender distribution was similar across conditions. However, because we observed a pattern of results that
was similar to previous studies that had full randomization, it is
less likely that other variables were responsible for the different
weight that hot-list participants versus cold-list participants as-

In the regulation of goals with a discrete completion point (e.g.,
getting married, finishing a paper), people often monitor their
progress by attending to what they have accomplished (to-date) or
to what they have yet to accomplish (to-go) to reach the goal end
state. In the current research, we investigated how emphasizing
each of these aspects of goals affects people’s motivation.
We identified two factors that increase motivation: high commitment and lack of progress (Fishbach & Dhar, 2005; Fishbach et
al., 2006). What a person has accomplished to date can be a sign
of high commitment (Bem, 1972) or progress (e.g., Bandura, 1991;
Carver & Scheier, 1981; 1990; Higgins, 1987; Locke & Latham,
1990), and what a person has yet to accomplish to reach the goal
can be a sign of a lack of commitment or lack of progress. The
current research shows that commitment certainty determines how
to-date information and to-go information are interpreted. We find
that to-date (vs. to-go) information signals high (vs. low) commitment when goal commitment is under consideration. We further
find that to-go (vs. to-date) information signals lack of (vs. sufficient) progress when goal commitment is certain and when the
pace of progress on the goal is under consideration. Furthermore,
a focus on to-date information versus to-go information has similar
effects on pursuing of personal goals (e.g., studying) and contributing to social goals (e.g., charity donations).
Our results across four studies support these hypotheses. By
keeping the amount of actual goal progress constant (approximately 50%), we found that the focus on what was accomplished
increases goal adherence when commitment is uncertain but that
the focus on what was not yet accomplished increases goal adherence when commitment is certain and high. Specifically, in Study
1, the focus on completed (vs. uncompleted) coursework increased
the motivation to study for an elective-course exam but decreased
the motivation to study for a core-course exam. In Study 2, the
focus on accumulating (vs. remaining) stamps on a frequent-buyer
card increased the motivation to use the card toward luxury rewards (e.g., mugs) but decreased the motivation to use the card
toward necessity rewards (e.g., textbooks).
In Studies 3 and 4, we tested these predictions in the context of
pursuing social goals. We found that, to the extent that people see
themselves as part of a social group that shares common goals,
information about the progress made to date by the group or about
the remaining efforts to go influenced their motivation. Specifically, in Study 3, providing information about the proportion of
students who already owned (vs. did not yet own) University of
Chicago merchandise increased the motivation to purchase these
items when the purchase was framed as fulfilling a desire, but it
decreased the motivation when the purchase was framed as fulfilling a need. Finally, in Study 4, in the context of charitable
giving, framing seed money in terms of accumulating progress (vs.
remaining progress to complete a campaign goal) increased firsttime donations but decreased repeated donations by regular donors.
We also found evidence for the underlying inferences that
motivate people to act on a goal. Thus, when commitment was
uncertain, participants inferred that the goal was important on the

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

(UN)ACCOMPLISHED GOAL ACTIONS

basis of to-date (vs. to-go) information and, therefore, were more
likely to adhere to the goal (Study 1). In addition, when commitment was certain, participants expected more goal progress when
the focus was on to-go (vs. to-date) information, which in turn
increased their motivation to adhere to the goal (Study 2). It
appears that whether people infer commitment or progress depends
on the question that they ask (Trope & Liberman, 1996); specifically, they can analyze their level of commitment (when commitment is uncertain) or their level of progress (when commitment is
certain).
These results have implications for previous research on discrepancy theories in self-regulation (see, e.g., Carver & Scheier,
1998; Elliot & Church, 1997; Gollwitzer, 1999; Kuhl & Beckmann, 1985; Locke & Latham, 1990; Miller et al., 1960; Pervin,
1989). Whereas discrepancy theories posit that self-regulation is
directed toward reducing the discrepancy between current state
and goal attainment, we find that the focus on the remaining
distance to goal attainment motivates action only if goal commitment is certain. If a person’s commitment is not yet certain,
feedback on the size of the discrepancy (to-go information) is more
discouraging than to-date information because it implies that the
goal may be less desirable or less feasible. Under these circumstances, the focus on the amount of achieved progress will be more
motivating than will attending to discrepancies.
These findings have specific relevance for research on regulatory focus theory and the distinction between self-regulation with
a promotion focus (hopes and aspirations) and self-regulation with
a prevention focus (duties and obligations; Higgins, 1987, 1997).
This stream of research has found that success feedback (equivalent to actions to date) is more motivating than failure feedback
(equivalent to actions to go) in a promotion focus, whereas failure
feedback is more motivating than success feedback in a prevention
focus (e.g., Förster, Grant, Idson, & Higgins, 2001; Idson, Liberman, & Higgins, 2000). If promotion-oriented people express
greater motivation after successes, it is possible that promotion
orientation represents goal pursuit that is not driven by perceived
discrepancy or by lack of progress but rather by an inference that
a person is committed to a goal end state.
It is notable that whereas in the current studies, we manipulated
the focus on actions to date versus actions to go, another factor that
influences motivation is the rate of accumulating progress (or
closing discrepancy), which could be lower or higher than what a
person expected (e.g., Carver & Scheier, 1998). We believe that
information on sufficient rate of progress can be akin to focusing
on what has been accomplished to date, whereas information on
insufficient rate of progress can be akin to focusing on what has
not been accomplished. For example, the time it took a charity
campaign to raise a given amount of seed money conveys the
information that the charity organization has accomplished a lot (if
high) versus conveying the notion that there is still a long way to
go (if low). However, whereas the rate of progress matters for
estimates of commitment and lack of progress, this information is
often unavailable, less accessible, or difficult to evaluate (e.g.,
What poses a slow rate of progress for a charity campaign?). In this
case, people base their motivation on what has been accomplished
(vs. what remains to be done), regardless of the rate of goal
progress.

193

The Time Frame for Goal-Related Actions
In this research, the actions completed to date were accomplished in the past and the remaining actions to go were possible
future actions. For example, in several studies, the graphic presentation (to-date frame vs. to-go frame) implied a timeline of sorts,
in which the left side of the midpoint represented past actions and
the right side represented future actions (e.g., Figure 6). However,
this timeline is not necessary, and our theory predicts that completed actions to date could have an effect similar to optimistic
plans for the future and that remaining actions to go could have an
effect similar to missed opportunities in the past.
Specifically, people often get a sense of accomplishment from
considering future plans or fantasies (Bandura, 1997; Oettingen &
Mayer, 2002). What characterizes such future plans is that they are
often optimistic, as people expect to achieve a lot in the future
(Buehler, Griffin, & Ross, 2002; Weinstein, 1989; Zauberman &
Lynch, 2005). When optimistic expectations increase the sense of
current accomplishment, they can increase commitment to a goal
or, alternatively, if a person asks about progress, optimistic expectations can substitute for present actions and can justify disengagement. As a demonstration of these effects, Zhang, Fishbach, and
Dhar (in press) found that expected future workouts affected the
decision to consume healthy food today either by signaling an
enhanced sense of commitment, in which case participants consumed more healthy foods, or by signaling high progress, in which
case participants consumed less healthy foods.
In addition, when people consider missed opportunities (i.e.,
what they failed to achieve in the past), their past actions should
have a similar effect as when people consider what they have yet
to accomplish; that is, past actions can signal lower commitment or
lack of progress. Regardless of the time frame of uncompleted
goal-related actions, when actions signal lack of progress, they
increase the motivation to adhere to a goal in the present, and when
actions signal lack of commitment, they reduce such motivation.
Taken together, we expect, for example, that a committed student is more likely to study today if he or she considers not
studying last week (a missed opportunity) or next week (an action
to go), a pattern that reflects a dynamic of balancing between goal
actions and that characterizes committed individuals. However, an
uncommitted student is more likely to study today if he or she
considers studying last week (an action to date) or plans to study
next week (an optimistic plan), a pattern that reflects a dynamic of
highlighting goal actions and that characterizes uncommitted individuals. Thus, the effect of completed and remaining actions
should be independent of time frame.

Implications for Personal Motivation and Public Policy
The current studies have implications for increasing personal
motivation as well as for public policy makers and for how social
organizations can persuade people to adhere to a social goal. First,
with regard to increasing the motivational strength of personal
goals, we propose that people can motivate themselves by attending either to what they have accomplished to date or to what they
have yet to accomplish to reach an end state, depending on the
basis for their motivation (establishing commitment versus monitoring progress). It is further possible that people strategically
attend to to-date information versus to-go information to relax

KOO AND FISHBACH

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

194

their effort and to license goal disengagement. For example, a
highly committed student can justify procrastinating by considering his or her completed coursework (high progress), whereas a
less committed student can justify procrastinating by considering
his or her remaining coursework (low commitment).
Second, for public policy makers, these studies shed light on
some of the ways social agents (e.g., educators, fundraisers, managers) can persuade others to contribute to a social goal with an
appropriate communication strategy. Such a strategy should take
into consideration a person’s commitment level, which determines
the basis for his or her motivation (commitment or progress based).
We demonstrated the importance of using the appropriate message
in Study 4, in which participants were more likely to make a
pledge if they received a message that corresponded to their
motivation to contribute to the charity campaign. On the basis of
these findings, we assume that the extent to which social agents
choose messages that fit people’s level of goal commitment will
affect the success of their persuasive appeal. In general, social
agents can be more effective when they account for people’s
dynamic of self-regulation in pursuing social goals.

References
Aarts, H., & Dijksterhuis, A. (2000). Habits as knowledge structures:
Automaticity in goal-directed behavior. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 78, 53– 63.
Ajzen, I. (1985). From intentions to actions: A theory of planned behavior.
In J. Kuhl & J. Beckman (Eds.), Action-control: From cognition to
behavior (pp. 11–39). Heidelberg, Germany: Springer Publishing Company.
Andreoni, J. (1989). Giving with impure altruism: Applications to charity
and Ricardian equivalence. Journal of Political Economy, 97, 1447–
1458.
Arkes, H. R., & Ayton, P. (1999). The sunk-cost and Concorde effects: Are
humans less rational than lower animals? Psychological Bulletin, 125,
591– 600.
Arkes, H. R., & Blumer, C. (1985). The psychology of sunk cost. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 35, 124 –140.
Aronson, E. (1997). The theory of cognitive dissonance: The evolution and
vicissitudes of an idea. In C. McGarty & S. A. Haslam (Eds.), The
message of social psychology: Perspectives on mind in society (pp.
20 –35). Malden, MA: Blackwell Publishers.
Bandura, A. (1991). Self-regulation of motivation through anticipatory and
self-reactive mechanisms. In R. A. Dienstbier (Ed.), Nebraska Symposium on Motivation, 1990, (pp. 69 –164). Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press.
Bandura, A. (1997). Self-efficacy: The exercise of control. New York:
Freeman.
Bem, D. J. (1972). Self-perception theory. In L. Berkowitz (Ed.), Advances
in experimental social psychology (Vol. 6, pp. 1– 62). New York: Academic Press.
Brewer, M. (2003). Optimal distinctiveness, social identity, and the self. In
M. R. Leary & J. P. Tangney (Eds.), Handbook of self and identity (pp.
480 – 491). New York: Guilford Press.
Brunstein, J. C., & Gollwitzer, P. M. (1996). Effects of failure on subsequent performance: The importance of self-defining goals. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 70, 395– 407.
Buehler, R., Griffin, D. W., & Ross, M. (2002). The triumph of hope over
experience: Exploring the planning fallacy. In T. Gilovich, D. W. Griffin, & D. Kahneman (Eds.), Heuristics and biases: The psychology of
intuitive judgment. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Carver, C. S., & Scheier, M. F. (1981). Control theory: A useful conceptual

framework for personality, social, clinical, and health psychology. Psychological Bulletin, 92, 111–135.
Carver, C. S., & Scheier, M. F., (1990). Origins and functions of positive
and negative affect: A control process view. Psychological Review, 97,
19 –35.
Carver, C. S., & Scheier, M. F. (1998). On the self-regulation of behavior.
New York: Cambridge University Press.
Cialdini, R. B., Trost, M. R., & Newsom, J. T. (1995). Preference for
consistency: The development of a valid measure and the discovery of
surprising behavioral implications. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 69, 318 –328.
Cooper, J., & Fazio, R. H. (1984). A new look at dissonance theory.
Advances in Experimental Social Psychology, 17, 229 –266.
Elliot, A. J., & Church, M. A. (1997). A hierarchical model of approach
and avoidance achievement motivation. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 72, 218 –232.
Feather, N. T. (1982). Actions in relation to expected consequences: An
overview of a research program. In N. T. Feather (Ed.), Expectations and
actions: Expectancy-value models in psychology (pp. 53–95). Hillsdale,
NJ: Erlbaum.
Ferguson, M. J., & Bargh, J. A. (2004). Liking is for doing: The effects of
goal pursuit on automatic evaluation. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 87, 557–572.
Festinger, L. A. (1957). A theory of cognitive dissonance. Stanford, CA:
Stanford University Press.
Fishbach, A., & Dhar, R. (2005). Goals as excuses or guides: The liberating
effect of perceived goal progress on choice. Journal of Consumer
Research, 32, 370 –377.
Fishbach, A., Dhar, R., & Zhang, Y. (2006). Subgoals as substitutes or
complements: The role of goal accessibility. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 91, 232–242.
Förster, J., Grant, H., Idson, L. C., & Higgins, E. T. (2001). Success/failure
feedback, expectancies, and approach/avoidance motivation: How regulatory focus moderates classic relations. Journal of Experimental Social
Psychology, 37, 253–260.
Förster, J., Liberman, N., & Higgins, E. (2005). Accessibility from active
and fulfilled goals. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 41,
220 –239.
Freedman, J. L., & Fraser, S. C. (1966). Compliance without pressure: The
foot-in-the door technique. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 4, 195–202.
Fundraising School. (1999). Principles and techniques of fundraising.
Indianapolis: Indiana University–Purdue University.
Gollwitzer, P. M. (1999). Implementation intentions: Strong effects of
simple plans. American Psychologist, 54, 493–503.
Gollwitzer, P. M., & Moskowitz, G. B. (1996). Goal effect on thought and
behavior. In E. T. Higgins & A. W. Kruglanski (Eds.), Social psychology: Handbook of basic principles (pp. 361–399). New York: Guilford
Press.
Higgins, E. T. (1987). Self-discrepancy: A theory relating self and affect.
Psychological Review, 94, 319 –340.
Higgins, E. T. (1997). Beyond pleasure and pain. American Psychologist,
52, 1280 –1300.
Idson, L. C., Liberman, N., & Higgins, E. (2000). Distinguishing gains
from nonlosses and losses from nongains: A regulatory focus perspective on hedonic intensity. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology,
36, 252–274.
Kruglanski, A. W., Shah, J. Y., Fishbach, A., Friedman, R., Chun, W. Y.,
& Sleeth-Keppler, D. (2002). A theory of goal systems. In M. P. Zanna
(Ed.), Advances in experimental social psychology (Vol. 34, pp. 331–
378), San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Kuhl, J., & Beckmann, J. (1985). Action control from cognition to behavior. New York: Springer-Verlag.
Lewin, K., Dembo, T., Festinger, L., & Sears, P. S. (1944). Level of

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

(UN)ACCOMPLISHED GOAL ACTIONS
aspiration. In J. M. Hunt (Ed.), Personality and the behavioral disorders
(pp. 333–371). New York: Roland Press.
List, J. A., & Lucking-Reiley, D. (2002). The effects of seed money and
refunds on charitable giving: Experimental evidence from a university
capital campaign. Journal of Political Economy, 110, 215–233.
Locke, E. A., & Latham, G. P. (1990). A theory of goal setting & task
performance. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Locke, E. A., & Latham, G. P. (2002). Building a practically useful theory
of goal setting and task motivation: A 35-year odyssey. American
Psychologist, 57, 705–717.
Miller, G. A., Galanter, E., & Pribram, K. H. (1960). Plans and the
structure of behavior. New York: Holt.
Monin, B., & Miller, D. T. (2001). Moral credentials and the expression of
prejudice. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 81, 33– 43.
Oettingen, G., & Mayer, D. (2002). The motivating function of thinking
about the future: Expectations versus fantasies. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 83, 1198 –1212.
Pervin, L. A. (1989). Goal concepts in personality and social psychology
(Vol. 8). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Prelec, D., & Loewenstein, G. (1998). The red and the black: Mental
accounting of savings and debt. Marketing Science, 17, 4 –28.
Thaler, R. (1980). Toward a positive theory of consumer choice. Journal of
Economic Behavior and Organization, 1, 39 – 60.

195

Tolman, E. C. (1955). Principles of performance. Psychological Review,
62, 315–326.
Trope, Y., & Liberman, A. (1996). Social hypothesis testing: Cognitive and
motivational mechanisms. In E. T. Higgins & A. W. Kruglanski (Eds.),
Social psychology: Handbook of basic principles (pp. 239 –270). New
York: Guilford Press.
Vroom, V. H. (1964). Work and motivation. New York: Wiley.
Weinstein, N. D. (1989). Effects of personal experience on self-protective
behavior. Psychological Bulletin, 105, 31–50.
Wicklund, R. A., & Gollwitzer, P. M. (1982). Symbolic self-completion.
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Zauberman, G., & Lynch, J. G. (2005). Resource slack and propensity to
discount delayed investments of time versus money. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 134, 23–37.
Zhang, Y., Fishbach, A., & Dhar, R. (in press). When thinking beats doing:
The role of optimistic expectations in goal-based choice. Journal of
Consumer Research.

Received February 17, 2007
Revision received July 25, 2007
Accepted August 2, 2007 䡲

