Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition
2008, Vol. 34, No. 3, 460 – 477

Copyright 2008 by the American Psychological Association
0278-7393/08/$12.00 DOI: 10.1037/0278-7393.34.3.460

Stereotypes and Retrieval-Provoked Illusory Source Recollections
Chad S. Dodson, James Darragh, and Allison Williams

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

University of Virginia
When expectations and stereotypes are activated at retrieval, they spontaneously create distorted and
illusory recollections that are consistent with these expectations. Participants studied doctor (physician)related and lawyer-related statements that were presented by 2 different people. When informed, on a
subsequent source memory test, (i.e., of who presented what) that one of the study sources was actually
a doctor and the other source was a lawyer, there was a strong tendency to attribute the test items in a
stereotype-consistent manner. In 3 experiments, participants frequently reported recollecting specific
details, such as via “remember” judgments, to justify their stereotype-consistent but incorrect responses.
These experiments rule out explanations involving either the misattribution of strong familiarity or
differences in the bias to making remember responses as accounts for the illusory source attributions.
Instead, the illusory recollections are consistent with the notion that recollective experience is manufactured from both the information in the memory trace and information in the retrieval environment, such
as an individual’s expectations, stereotypes, and general knowledge.
Keywords: source memory, stereotypes, remember, recollection, false memory

good source identification performance for statements that were
consistent with the source’s profession and poor performance for
statements that were inconsistent with the source’s profession.
Essentially, source attributions were biased in favor of responding
in a stereotype-consistent manner and against responding in a
stereotype-inconsistent manner. Recently, similar patterns of biased memory performance have been observed with stereotypes
involving gender, sexual orientation, and race (Marsh et al., 2006;
B. K. Payne, Jacoby, & Lambert, 2004).
These results are consistent with Johnson, Hashtroudi, and Lindsay’s (1993) source monitoring framework (SMF). The process of
identifying the origin of a memory is influenced by various decision processes that are used to assess the kind, amount, and likely
source of remembered information (e.g., Dodson & Johnson, 1996;
Hicks & Cockman, 2003; Mather et al., 1999; Spaniol & Bayen,
2002). Stereotypes, like other background knowledge, influence
how remembered information is evaluated and weighted, so that
individuals are biased to respond in a stereotype-consistent manner. Building on the SMF, Bayen and colleagues proposed a
probability matching account of the influence of stereotypes on
performance (e.g., Spaniol & Bayen, 2002). Specifically, when
participants fail to recollect source-identifying information about a
test item, they guess a source by responding in a way that matches
their sense of the likelihood or probability that the test item is
associated with a particular source (e.g., “I can’t remember who
presented this item, but I know that Jane’s a doctor. Therefore, she
likely presented this doctor-like sentence”), thus producing
stereotype-biased performance (Spaniol & Bayen, 2002; see Dodson & Johnson, 1996, for a related view).
Researchers within social psychology have reached similar conclusions about the influence of stereotypes and expectations on
behavior. For instance, Ross and Conway (1986) proposed that in
the absence of memory for specific details about past beliefs,
individuals infer a past belief on the basis of their current beliefs
and their expectations about the stability of this belief across time

Over the past 30 years, there has been much interest in the
influence of stereotypes on memory. Early stereotype studies suggested that when stereotypes are activated at retrieval, they distort
recollections of earlier events. For instance, when individuals were
told at the time of a recognition test that a previously described
character, Betty K., was now living either a heterosexual or a
lesbian lifestyle, individuals were likely to incorrectly recognize
novel statements that were consistent with their expectations or
schema about the designated lifestyle (Snyder & Uranowitz, 1978;
see also Dooling & Christiaansen, 1977; Sulin & Dooling, 1974).
However, rather than stemming from distorted recollections, subsequent studies noted that the foregoing false alarm results in the
Betty K. study likely arose from schema-consistent guessing or
response biases (Bellezza & Bower, 1981; Clark & Woll, 1981).
A large amount of cognitive and social psychological research
suggests that when stereotypes are provided at retrieval, they affect
memory performance primarily through decision or guessing processes (e.g., Bayen, Nakamura, Dupuis, & Yang, 2000; Hirt,
McDonald, & Markman, 1998; Marsh, Cook & Hicks, 2006;
Mather, Johnson, & De Leonardis, 1999; Sherman & Bessenoff,
1999). Consider, for example, the influence of stereotypes on
source monitoring, that is, on people’s ability to identify the origin
of a test item. In a typical procedure, participants see two different
individuals present equivalent numbers of doctor (physician)-like
(e.g., how long have you had the fever?), lawyer-like (e.g., you
face a fine of $500), and neutral (e.g., I love to play tennis)
sentences (e.g., Bayen et al, 2000; Hicks & Cockman, 2003).
When told during the memory test that one source was actually a
doctor and the other source was a lawyer, participants showed

Chad S. Dodson, James Darragh, and Allison Williams, Department of
Psychology, University of Virginia.
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Chad S.
Dodson, Department of Psychology, P.O. Box 400400, University of
Virginia, Charlottesville, VA 22904. E-mail: cdodson@virginia.edu
460

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

STEREOTYPES AND ILLUSORY RECOLLECTIONS

(see also Hirt, Lynn, Payne, Krackow, & McCrea, 1999, for
similar views). Moreover, the notion that stereotypes and expectancies dominate performance when individuals fail to recollect
specific details has been supported by a number of studies that
have degraded people’s ability to remember past events or to
engage in controlled processes during retrieval (e.g., Cook, Marsh,
& Hicks, 2003; Macrae & Bodenhausen, 2000; Sherman & Bessenoff, 1999). In sum, a prominent view within cognitive and
social psychology is that when expectations and stereotypes are
activated at retrieval, they influence performance by altering participants’ decision strategies and response biases.
We, however, are investigating a different hypothesis about why
stereotypes influence performance. According to our retrieval expectation account, stereotypes and expectations increase the likelihood that participants falsely recollect information that is consistent with the stereotype. Our hypothesis draws on Tulving’s
(1983) notion of synergistic ecphory. Recollective experience,
according to this view, is not just a product of information that has
been activated from the memory trace. Instead, the experience of
recollection is assembled from activated trace information and
from information in the retrieval cue and retrieval environment.
Consequently, illusory recollections may occur when information
in the retrieval cue is incorporated into the recollective experience.
Support for our retrieval expectation hypothesis comes from Hicks
and Cockman (2003), who observed that when individuals responded incorrectly, but in a stereotype-consistent manner, they
generally assigned high levels of confidence to their errors, contrary to the expectation that if individuals had been guessing, then
they would have assigned low confidence to their responses.
The hypothesis that recollective experience is a constructive
activity that is, to some degree, independent of what was encoded
is consistent with the thinking of other theorists (e.g., Brainerd,
Payne, Wright, & Reyna, 2003; Higham & Vokey, 2004; Johnson
et al., 1993; Lindsay & Kelley, 1996; Schacter et al., 1998;
Whittlesea, 2004). For example, Lindsay and Kelley (1996) proposed that “a person’s knowledge and beliefs are another source of
thoughts and images coming fluently to mind during attempts to
remember, as illustrated in numerous experiments demonstrating
schema- or script-based intrusions in recall and recognition” (p.
208). Similarly, Whittlesea (2004) suggested that subjective feelings of remembering or of familiarity depend in part on expectations about what should be remembered in a particular situation.
Moreover, illusory recollections have been documented as contributing to memory errors in a variety of different paradigms (e.g., Chan
& McDermott, 2006; Hannigan & Reinitz, 2001; Higham & Vokey,
2004; Johnson & Raye, 1981; Lampinen, Copeland, & Neuschatz,
2001; Roediger & McDermott, 1995; Zaragoza & Lane, 1994). In the
eyewitness testimony paradigm, much evidence shows that participants can actually remember having seen an object that was only
suggested to them (e.g., Frost, 2000; Lindsay, 1990; Zaragoza &
Lane, 1994). In the DRM paradigm, participants will often claim to
recollect specific details about encountering a nonpresented item that
happens to be similar to what was studied, such as remembering
whether it was presented by a woman or a man (e.g., D. G. Payne,
Elie, Blackwell, & Neuschatz, 1996; Roediger & McDermott, 1995).
Moreover, brain imaging data indicate that true and false memories
are sometimes associated with comparable amounts of activity in the
same sensory areas, suggesting that they evoke similar subjective
experiences (e.g., Schacter & Slotnick, 2004). The foregoing pattern

461

of data is consistent with a key tenet of Johnson and colleagues’ SMF
that both illusory and true memories are sometimes associated with
comparably vivid mental experiences (e.g., Johnson et al., 1993;
Mitchell & Johnson, 2000; see also Schacter, Norman, & Koutstaal,
1998).
The present research extends this notion of illusory recollections
and constructive processes to the question of how stereotypes and
expectations influence behavior when these stereotypes/
expectations have been activated at the time of retrieval, a question
that has generally been answered in terms of guessing or decision
processes. It is important to note that although the retrieval expectation account provides an alternative explanation of the influence
of stereotypes, it is not exclusive with respect to the guessing
account. That is, we believe that stereotypes affect behavior in
multiple ways by influencing decision strategies as well as by
creating stereotype-consistent illusory recollections.

Experiment 1
Experiment 1 used the following procedure to investigate
whether stereotypes create illusory recollections of past events that
are consistent with the stereotype. As in the Bayen et al. (2000)
and Hicks and Cockman (2003) studies, our participants studied
equal numbers of doctor-related, lawyer-related, and neutral sentences that were presented by two different male sources, Tom and
Bill. At the time of the source memory test, participants were told
that one source was a doctor and the other source was a lawyer. In
addition, however, we manipulated the format of the source memory test across participants. Half of the participants initially made
an “old–new” judgment and, for items judged old, participants
then identified whether Tom or Bill was the source of the item.
This procedure is comparable to the typical source test format. For
the remaining participants, however, the format of the source
memory test differed after they made their initial old–new judgment. For items judged old, these participants then made a source
judgment about who presented it during the study phase or they
responded that they could not remember the source (i.e., Tom, Bill,
or don’t know). Critically, these participants were directed to
select Tom or Bill only if they vividly remembered the source that
presented the item during the study phase. We used instructions
similar to those used to guide participants to make a “remember”
response in the remember– know paradigm (e.g., Gardiner & Java,
1993; Tulving, 1985). If participants did not experience a vivid
recollection, they were told to respond “don’t know.” Above all,
participants were instructed not to guess the source. A similar
don’t know procedure has been used by others to increase the
likelihood that a source attribution is based on a convincing sense
of remembering and not on a guess (e.g., Gallo & Roediger, 2003;
Lampinen, Neuschatz, & Payne, 1999; Macrae, Schloerscheidt,
Bodenhausen, & Milne, 2002; D. G. Payne et al., 1996; Roediger,
McDermott, Pisoni, & Gallo, 2004).
We expected the standard source test to replicate existing studies and show stereotype-biased performance. This test, however, is
unable to discriminate between the guessing and illusory recollection accounts because both processes can yield the same pattern of
results. Participants can select an incorrect, but stereotypeconsistent, source because they fail to recollect source information
and guess in a stereotype-consistent manner. Alternatively, participants may select the incorrect source because they experience an

DODSON, DARRAGH, AND WILLIAMS

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

462

illusory and false recollection. The standard test confounds both of
these processes.
The modified source test was designed to separate the contributions
of guessing and illusory recollections to performance. The guessing
hypothesis predicts that there should be no subjective experience of
recollection that is associated with incorrect responses. Participants
should respond don’t know rather than guess Tom or Bill under the
modified test instructions. Responding with don’t know instead of
guessing a source greatly reduces or eliminates the pattern of biased
source attributions, whereby correctly remembering the source is
superior for the stereotype-consistent over the stereotype-inconsistent
items. By contrast, the retrieval expectation hypothesis assumes that
errors in this paradigm can be recollection based. When participants
fail to select the correct source, they will likely choose the incorrect
source rather than respond don’t know. In sum, the guessing hypothesis predicts an interaction between the test condition (i.e., the standard test format vs. the modified test format) and the degree of match
between the profession of the source and the content of the test
statement. The retrieval expectation hypothesis, by contrast, predicts
no such interaction.

Method
Participants
Sixty-four undergraduate students from the University of Virginia participated in this experiment in exchange for course credit.
The participants were randomly assigned to either the modified
source test condition (i.e., the source test contains a don’t know
response option) or the standard source test condition (i.e., the
source test does not contain a don’t know response option).

Design and Materials
The stimulus material, adopted from Bayen et al. (2000), consisted
of 192 sentences that were presented visually only. The sentences
were divided into three categories on the basis of their content: 64
doctor-related items, 64 lawyer-related items, and 64 professionneutral items. Within each category, there were 32 target sentences
(e.g. “Do you have any food allergies?”) and 32 distractor sentences
that were identical to the targets, except for the modification of one or
two words (e.g. “Do you have any drug allergies?”).
During the study session, 96 items (i.e., 32 target sentences from
each category) were presented simultaneously with a color photo
of one of two middle-aged Caucasian male faces, labeled Bill or
Tom. Each source was paired with 16 sentences from each of the
three categories. An additional 6 filler items at the beginning and
the end of the study phase were included so as to reduce primacy
and recency effects.
The test phase consisted of 48 studied items intermixed with 48
distractor items (i.e., new items). Sixteen studied items were from
each category, with an equal number associated with the sources
Bill and Tom. Moreover, the new distractor items included 16
doctor sentences, 16 lawyer sentences, and 16 neutral sentences.
There were an additional 6 practice items at the beginning of the
test, which were used to demonstrate the task to participants.
All study and test items were presented in a random order, with the
constraint that no more than 3 items of a particular type could appear
consecutively. The experimental program was created with E-prime

Version 1.1 (2002), and the sentences and photos were presented on
a 17-in. (43.2-cm) monitor. Finally, across participants, we counterbalanced (a) assignment of sentences to the target and distractor
conditions and (b) assignment of sentences to both sources.

Procedure
The study items were presented in an incidental manner. Participants were told that they would see a series of sentences, and each
would be associated with a person, Bill or Tom, represented by the
individual’s picture. They were asked to rate how easily they could
imagine the source, either Bill or Tom, saying the sentence. Responses were made on a keyboard with a 5-point Likert scale to
identify the difficulty of imagining the sentences. No mention was
made of the subsequent memory test. Presentation proceeded at the
rate of one sentence every 3.5 s, and participants were asked to make
their imageability response before this time elapsed.
After viewing the study items, participants were told about the
surprise source memory test. However, before the test began, they
were informed that it would be helpful for them to know that one
speaker was, in fact, a lawyer, and the other was a doctor. Participants were told that the test would consist of studied sentences as
well as new sentences that had not been encountered earlier. All
test items appeared visually at the top of the screen, with either the
old–new question (i.e., “Was this sentence presented by one of the
sources earlier?”) or the source question (i.e., “Who originally
presented this statement. Was it Bill or Tom?”) appearing 3 cm
below the test item. Pictures of the two sources were shown
underneath the source question in the center of the screen with
their name and assigned profession (e.g., “Bill, lawyer”) below the
corresponding picture.
In the standard source test condition, participants first determined whether the sentence was old (a previously presented item)
or new. For test items receiving a response of old, participants then
identified whether the sentence had been paired earlier with Bill or
with Tom during the study phase. In the modified source test
condition, participants also first determined whether the sentence
was old or new. For items receiving a response of old, participants
decided whether the item was presented earlier by Bill or by Tom
or whether they could not remember (i.e., don’t know). During the
test instructions, participants were told that it was important for
them to respond Bill or Tom only if they vividly recollected the
source presenting the item during the study phase. Moreover,
participants were warned not to guess and to select don’t know if
they could not distinctly remember who presented the item during
the study phase. For every test item, the following reminder not to
guess appeared at the bottom of the screen, “It’s important that you
don’t guess. Only respond ‘Tom’ or ‘Bill’ if you specifically
remember one of them presenting the statement, otherwise respond
‘don’t know’.” In sum, the modified source test and standard
source test conditions were identical in every respect except for the
don’t know option and its associated instructions. In both conditions, participants progressed through the test at their own pace.

Results and Discussion
For all of the analyses we used partial eta squared (␩2) as a
measure of effect size.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

STEREOTYPES AND ILLUSORY RECOLLECTIONS

Table 1 presents the conditional source scores (CSIM) for the
studied items on the modified and the standard source tests. CSIM
scores were computed by determining the rate at which individuals
attributed an item to the correct source when they made an attribution
to Tom or Bill (e.g., Murnane & Bayen, 1996). On the modified test,
this source score ignored responses of don’t know and was based only
on the proportion of responses of Bill or Tom that were correct. In
order to verify that we replicated Bayen et al. (2000) and Hicks and
Cockman (2003), we first analyzed the source scores from the standard source test condition. A 3 (statement type: doctor-like vs. lawyerlike vs. neutral) ⫻ 2 (source: doctor vs. lawyer) analysis of variance
(ANOVA) revealed a significant main effect of statement type, F(2,
62) ⫽ 18.49, MSE ⫽ .03, p ⬍ .001, ␩2 ⫽ .37; a significant interaction,
F(2, 62) ⫽ 20.52, MSE ⫽ .112, p ⬍ .001, ␩2 ⫽ .40; and no significant
effect of source (F ⬍ 1). As in previous studies, we observed that
source identification rates were higher for neutral statements than for
either doctor-related or lawyer-related statements. Critically, however,
we replicated the Statement Type ⫻ Source interaction, whereby
participants showed better source identification performance when
there was a match (.75) than when there was a mismatch (.38)
between the profession of the source and the statement (e.g., the
doctor saying doctor-like rather than lawyer-like statements).
Moreover, we further analyzed the data from the standard source
test with the identical multinomial model that was used by Bayen
et al. (2000). A four parameter, two-high-threshold model fit the
data from each item type condition, G 2(2)s ⬍ 2.22, G 2(2)critical ⫽
5.99. The two notable assumptions of this model are that item
recognition is equivalent for items from both sources and that
source memory is equal for both sources. Thus, this model explains the foregoing differences in conditional source scores in
terms of different biases to guess one source over the other. The g
parameter in the model refers to the probability of guessing doctor,
with 1 – g referring to the probability of guessing lawyer. A value
of .5, for instance, corresponds to an equivalent bias of guessing
doctor or lawyer. As Bayen et al. observed, there were significant
differences across the three different statement types in the bias to
respond with a particular source. We found that the bias to respond
doctor was significantly greater for the doctor-like statements (g ⫽
.71) than for the neutral statements (g ⫽ .47), which was signifi-

Table 1
Source Identification Scores on the Standard and Modified
Source Tests
Source test
Item type/
Source
Doctor-related
Doctor
Lawyer
Lawyer-related
Doctor
Lawyer
Neutral
Doctor
Lawyer

Standard

Modified

.76 (.04)
.39 (.06)

.79 (.08)
.51 (.09)

.36 (.06)
.75 (.04)

.59 (.11)
.77 (.07)

.72 (.04)
.74 (.03)

.86 (.04)
.90 (.02)

Note. The modified test includes the option of responding “don’t know,”
whereas the standard test does not include this option. Parentheses contain
the standard error of the mean.

463

cantly different from the bias for the lawyer-like statements (g ⫽
.27), all G2(1)s ⬎ 37.81, p’s ⬍ .0001. Analyses of the remaining
parameter values showed no significant differences in source
memory (d parameter) between the doctor-related (.26) and
lawyer-related (.13) items, although each was significantly lower
than source memory for the neutral items (.61), G2(1)s ⬎ 9.42,
ps ⬍ .01. Lastly, item recognition (D parameter) of the different
item types differed significantly across types, G 2(1)s ⬎ 9.47, ps ⬍
.01, and exhibited the following pattern: neutral (.55) ⬎ doctorrelated (.37) ⬎ lawyer-related (.24). Overall, we replicated Bayen
et al. (2000) in nearly every respect.
At first glance, it may appear odd that the neutral items are
better recognized than the profession statements, particularly as
repeated exposure to the doctor and lawyer themes should produce
strong memories for the gist of these items. However, all previous
studies using these kinds of materials have observed better memory for the neutral items (Bayen et al., 2000; Hicks & Cockman,
2003). There are a variety of reasons for this effect. First, increased
memory for the neutral items may reflect an atypicality effect (e.g.,
Lampinen et al., 2001). As most of the studied items are related to
the doctor and lawyer themes, items that violate these themes may
be especially salient and memorable.1 Alternatively, as Bayen et
al. (2000) noted, the neutral statements may be especially memorable because of some other characteristic about these items.
We turn now to our central question, To what extent does the
particular test format (i.e., standard vs. modified) affect source identification performance when there is either a match or a mismatch
between the content of the statement and the profession of the source?
To answer this question, we compared source identification performance (i.e., the proportion of attributions to Tom and Bill that are
correct) on the standard and the modified source tests. Note that on the
modified test, this source score ignores responses of don’t know and
is based only on the proportion of Bill or Tom responses that are
correct. This means that on both tests, that score is computed in the
same way: the proportion of correct attributions to Bill or Tom given
a response of Bill or Tom. A 2 (test condition: standard vs. modified) ⫻ 3 (statement type: doctor-like vs. lawyer-like vs. neutral) ⫻ 2
(source: doctor vs. lawyer) ANOVA of the conditional source scores
yielded a significant effect of test condition, F(1, 50) ⫽ 9.48, MSE ⫽
.11, p ⬍ .01, ␩2 ⫽ .16, indicating that performance was better overall
on the modified test than on the standard test. There was also a
significant effect of statement type, F(2, 100) ⫽ 22.10, MSE ⫽ .05,
p ⬍ .001, ␩2 ⫽ .30, reflecting better source identification performance
for the neutral statements than for the doctor-related or lawyer-related
statements.
Finally, there was a significant statement type by source interaction, F(2, 100) ⫽ 18.70, MSE ⫽ .12, p ⬍ .001, ␩2 ⫽ .27,
whereby performance was superior when the profession of the
source and the statement type matched than when they mismatched. Critically, however, the test condition manipulation did
not interact with any of the other factors (all Fs ⬍ 1.24). Thus, in
contrast to the predictions of the guessing hypothesis, the opportunity to respond don’t know did not significantly reduce the
magnitude of the match–mismatch effect in the modified source
test condition as compared with the standard source test condition.
1

We thank Chuck Brainerd for making this point.

DODSON, DARRAGH, AND WILLIAMS

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

464

However, the data from the mismatch conditions (i.e., doctorrelated items presented by the lawyer source and lawyer-related
items presented by the doctor source) across both test formats
suggest that a mixture of decision processes and illusory recollections contributed to performance. Table 1 clearly shows that the
conditional source scores on the standard test in the mismatch
conditions (.39 and .36) were significantly below chance, where
chance was 50%, i.e., t(31) ⫽ 2.39, p ⬍ .05. On the modified test,
performance in the mismatch conditions was no different from
chance. Thus, the modified test appears to have allowed participants to use the don’t know option to filter out guessing biases that
would otherwise produce below-chance performance. At the same
time, however, chance performance in the mismatch condition on
the modified test appears to have been caused by illusory recollections that are consistent with the stereotype.
Turning to the data from the modified source test, we further
investigated whether stereotype information at retrieval creates illusory recollections. The left-hand column of data in Table 2 presents
the proportion of all old responses (i.e., recognized items) that were
attributed to the incorrect source. Recall that we admonished participants not to guess but to respond with a particular source only when
they vividly remembered this source presenting the item during the
study phase. Therefore, these incorrect source attributions are presumably based on recollective experience. A 3 (statement type: doctorlike vs. lawyer-like vs. neutral) ⫻ 2 (source: doctor vs. lawyer)
ANOVA of the rate of incorrect source attributions revealed a significant effect of statement type, F(2, 62) ⫽ 8.07, MSE ⫽ .038, p ⬍ .01,
␩2 ⫽ .21, and a significant statement type by source interaction, F(2,
62) ⫽ 8.57, MSE ⫽ .084, p ⬍ .01, ␩2 ⫽ .22. False recollections were
much more frequent when there was a mismatch between the content
of the statement and the profession of the source (.30) than when there
was either a match (.09), t(31) ⫽ 3.13, p ⬍ .01, or a neutral statement
(.08), t(31) ⫽ 3.52, p ⬍ .01. In line with the illusory recollection
account, stereotypes at retrieval appear to create subjectively compelling, yet illusory, recollections that are consistent with the stereotype.
Lastly, we examined the proportion of items judged old that
were then assigned a response of don’t know, as shown in the right
column of Table 2. A 3 (statement type: doctor-like vs. lawyer-like
vs. neutral) ⫻ 2 (source: doctor vs. lawyer) ANOVA of the
proportion of don’t know responses yielded no significant effects
(all Fs ⬍ 2.25). Participants responded don’t know at nearly
Table 2
Proportion of Recognized Items That Are Either Assigned to the
Incorrect Source or Are Given a Response of “Don’t Know”
Modified source test
Item type/
Source
Doctor-related
Doctor
Lawyer
Lawyer-related
Doctor
Lawyer
Neutral
Doctor
Lawyer

Incorrect

Don’t know

.09 (.03)
.32 (.06)

.39 (.06)
.34 (.05)

.29 (.07)
.10 (.03)

.42 (.07)
.43 (.07)

.09 (.02)
.07 (.02)

.33 (.06)
.24 (.05)

Note. Parentheses contain the standard error of the mean.

identical rates when the lawyer-related statements were presented
by either the lawyer or the doctor. Similarly, there were comparable don’t know rates to doctor-related statements that were
presented by the doctor and by the lawyer.
In sum, participants receiving the modified source test used the
don’t know option nearly 40% of the time for profession statements that were recognized as old and substantially improved
overall source identification rates for these items—relative to
participants receiving the standard test— by filtering out guesses.
Nevertheless, participants were unable to use the don’t know
response to significantly reduce the magnitude of biased source
identification rates to test items in which the content of the statement either matched or mismatched the profession of the source. In
fact, when there was a mismatch between the statement and the
profession of the source, participants were equally likely to select
the correct and the incorrect source on the modified test even
though they were continually warned to base source identification
judgments only on the presence of recollective details. Overall,
then, the foregoing results indicate that stereotypes create false
recollections and also influence guessing processes.

Experiment 2
Experiment 1 indicates that illusory recollections about the
origin of a statement can be created by providing stereotype
information at the time of retrieval. However, the conclusions from
Experiment 1 depend on the assumption that the don’t know option
captures all of the guessing responses. If a participant forgets to
use the don’t know response and, instead, guesses a source, then
this assumption is invalidated. Although participants used the
don’t know response roughly 40% of the time to improve source
identification performance on the modified test, this is in no way
proof that all guessing responses have been eradicated from contributing to source attributions on this test. Therefore, we conducted another experiment with a combined source memory and
remember– know procedure to examine the influence of stereotype
information on illusory recollections.
A number of studies have examined the basis of participants’
source attributions by requiring them to identify whether the source
judgment was based either on the conscious recollection of specific
details about initially encountering the item during the study phase
(i.e., a remember judgment) or on a sense of familiarity and recognition that the item was encountered before, but in the absence of
remembering any specific details about this encounter (i.e., a know
judgment; e.g., Dewhurst & Hitch, 1999; Hicks, Marsh, & Ritschel,
2002; Meiser & Bröder, 2002; Meiser & Sattler, 2006; Perfect,
Mayes, Downes, & Van Eijk, 1996). For example, Meiser and Bröder
(2002) observed that if participants correctly retrieved one attribute
about a past event, such as correctly retrieving a word’s location, they
were much more likely to retrieve the event’s other attribute (e.g., the
word’s particular font) for source attributions accompanied with remember states than for those accompanied with know states (see also
Meiser & Sattler, 2006).
For our purposes, the remember– know source paradigm is useful in two ways. First, in contrast to Experiment 1, where we
inferred that the absence of a don’t know response indicated a
judgment based on recollective details, here we directly tested this
inference by requiring participants to make a conscious assessment
of the memorial basis of each source attribution (i.e., by providing

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

STEREOTYPES AND ILLUSORY RECOLLECTIONS

a remember or know response for each source attribution). Second,
this paradigm allowed us to test predictions of prevailing social
and cognitive psychological theory against those of the retrieval
expectation account about the influence of stereotypes.
Many social psychological theories assume an inverse relationship between the influence of stereotypes and the availability or
use of individuating information (e.g., Kunda & Thagard, 1996;
Macrae & Bodenhausen, 2000; Spears & Haslam, 1997). It is
thought that stereotype information is likely to influence behavior
when an individual fails to use, or does not have access to,
individuating information about a particular person or object.
Many cognitive theories also assume that general knowledge and
expectations about the world, such as stereotypes, are likely to
influence behavior when individuals fail to recollect specific information about the past (e.g., Bayen et al., 2000; Johnson et al.,
1993; Mather et al., 1999). Both theoretical accounts assume that
the process of recollection will reduce the frequency of systematic
errors that are caused by stereotypes and general knowledge.
With respect to the remember– know source paradigm, the foregoing assumption about an inverse relationship between recollection and stereotypes means that stereotypes should have less of an
effect on performance when source attributions are based on the
presence of memory for specific details (remember judgments)
than on their absence (know judgments). For instance, consider a
situation whereby an individual does not remember specific details
about who presented an item and responds exclusively on the basis
of guessing the source whose profession corresponds with the
statement, such as attributing all of the doctor-related statements to
the source who is a doctor. Because the doctor source presented
equal numbers of doctor-related and lawyer-related statements,
this strategy of guessing in a stereotype-consistent manner increases performance for the doctor-related items that this source
presented and decreases performance for the lawyer-related items
that this source presented, thus producing a large difference in
performance between the match and mismatch conditions. If,
however, participants respond on the basis of remembering specific details about encountering the item, then they essentially can
use recollection to counteract the deleterious influence of stereotypes and boost performance in the mismatch condition.
There are two different sets of predictions that are made by
standard cognitive and social accounts and the retrieval expectation account about the influence of stereotypes on performance.
According to standard accounts if recollection accurately reflects
past experience, then it should minimize differences in source
identification performance between the conditions when the profession of the source either matches or mismatches the content of
the statement. Put another way, source attributions that are based
on know responses should be associated with larger differences in
performance between the match and mismatch conditions, as compared with source attributions that are based on remember responses. By contrast, the retrieval expectation account assumes
that the process of recollection cannot reliably counteract the
influence of stereotypes because recollection is an imperfect process that is sometimes distorted by, and made consistent with,
stereotype information. Therefore, this account predicts that stereotypes in the match and mismatch conditions will influence
source attributions that are accompanied by remember judgments
just as much as they influences source attributions that are accompanied by know judgments.

465

More importantly, the standard account and the retrieval expectation account make different predictions about the subjective
experience that accompanies erroneous source attributions. According to the standard account, when participants fail to recollect
source-identifying information, they use stereotypes to guess a
particular source. Guessing is associated with an absence of recollective experience. Therefore, in terms of remember and know
phenomenology, participants should give primarily know responses to incorrect source attributions, regardless of whether the
attributions are stereotype consistent or stereotype inconsistent. By
contrast, the retrieval expectation account predicts that participants
will tend to search for and activate expectation-consistent information. This will predispose participants to experience
expectation-consistent illusory recollections and, consequently, to
make more false remember responses to erroneous source attributions that are stereotype consistent than to erroneous source attributions that are stereotype inconsistent. However, we acknowledge that other accounts, such as fuzzy trace theory, also predict
increased false remember responses for stereotype-consistent
source attributions. We distinguish between these alternative accounts in Experiment 3.

Method
Participants
Eighteen undergraduate students from the University of Virginia
participated in this experiment.

Design and Materials
We modified the design from Experiment 1 slightly, primarily
by doubling the number of test items that were encountered at
encoding and by including the remember– know test instructions.
The stimuli were similar to those used in Experiment 1 and
consisted of 144 sentences randomly divided into three sets of 48
sentences, with each set containing 16 doctor-related, 16 lawyerrelated, and 16 neutral items. The three sets of items were counterbalanced and rotated across three conditions: (a) items presented
by Bill, (b) items presented by Tom, and (c) new items that were
not presented during the study phase. Additionally, half of the
participants were told during the test that Bill was a doctor and
Tom was a lawyer, and the remaining participants were told the
opposite. The study phase thus consisted of 96 sentences: one set
of 48 sentences presented by Bill and the other set of 48 sentences
presented by Tom. These items were presented at a 5-s rate and in
a quasi-random order with no more than three consecutive items
presented by the same source. Six additional filler sentences were
included at the beginning and at the end of the study phase to
reduce primacy and recency effects. The test consisted of 144
sentences (96 old items and 48 new items), with an additional 6
practice items at the beginning of the test that were used to
demonstrate the task to participants. All other details about the
study and test phase were identical to Experiment 1.

Procedure
We used the same study instructions that were used in Experiment 1. Before beginning the memory test, participants were
informed that one source was a doctor and the other source was a

DODSON, DARRAGH, AND WILLIAMS

466

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

lawyer, as in Experiment 1. Participants then completed the source
memory test in which they determined whether the test sentence
was presented by Bill or by Tom during the encoding phase or was
a new sentence that had not been encountered earlier. Following
responses of Bill or Tom, participants then made a remember or a
know judgment as a basis for their source attribution (e.g., Rajaram, 1993; Rotello, Macmillan, & Reeder, 2004). That is, participants were told that a remember judgment:
should occur when their memory of who originally presented the
statement is accompanied by a conscious recollection of its prior
occurrence. To remember is the ability to become consciously aware
again of some aspect or aspects of what happened or what was
experienced at the time the sentence was presented, such as aspects of
the physical appearance of the sentence and the accompanying picture
of Bill or Tom, or of what you were thinking when you saw the
sentence. In other words the remembered statement should bring back
to mind either a particular visual image or something more personal
from the time of study or something about its appearance, or position
in the study sequence.

By contrast, participants were told that a know judgment:
should occur when they recognize that the sentence was in the study
phase but they cannot consciously recollect anything about its actual
occurrence or what happened, or what was experienced at the time of
its occurrence. To know means that you know you encountered the
sentence before and it is familiar, but you have no specific recollective
associations about it.

All participants indicated that they understood the distinction
between remember and know responses.

Results and Discussion
Table 3 presents the conditional source scores for the studied
items overall and broken down in terms of source scores for
remember judgments and for know judgments. The overall scores
replicate the basic findings from Experiment 1. A 3 (statement
type: doctor-like vs. lawyer-like vs. neutral) ⫻ 2 (source: doctor
vs. lawyer) ANOVA of the overall scores revealed a significant
main effect of statement type, F(2, 34) ⫽ 38.20, MSE ⫽.02, p ⬍
.001, ␩2 ⫽ .69, reflecting higher source identification rates for
neutral statements than for either doctor-related or lawyer-related
statements. There was also a significant interaction, F(2, 34) ⫽
7.30, MSE ⫽.06, p ⬍ .01, ␩2 ⫽ .30, and no significant effect of
source (F ⬍ 1). As in Experiment 1, participants showed better
source identification performance when there was a match (.71)
than when there was a mismatch (.48) between the profession of
the source and the statement (e.g., the doctor presenting doctor-like
rather than lawyer-like statements).
Evidence for the occurrence of illusory recollections comes
from an examination of source identification scores that are associated with remember and know responses, as shown in Table 3.
Prevailing theory predicts that if recollecting specific details about
who presented the statement counteracts and minimizes the influence of stereotypes, then source identification performance that is
based on remember judgments should be less influenced by
whether there is a match or a mismatch between the source and the
statement. In other words, this view predicts a smaller difference in
source accuracy between the match and mismatch conditions when

Table 3
Source Identification Scores Overall and for Remember and
Know Judgments
Source score
Item type/
Source
Doctor-related
Doctor
Lawyer
Lawyer-related
Doctor
Lawyer
Neutral
Doctor
Lawyer

Overall

Remember

Know

.71 (.04)
.48 (.06)

.85 (.04)
.46 (.08)

.57 (.06)
.47 (.06)

.48 (.05)
.70 (.05)

.46 (.09)
.83 (.06)

.50 (.08)
.56 (.07)

.83 (.03)
.84 (.02)

.88 (.03)
.89 (.02)

.70 (.07)
.73 (.07)

Note. Parentheses contain the standard error of the mean.

source attributions are based on remember responses than when
these attributions are based on know responses.
We performed a 2 (remember– know) ⫻ 3 (statement type:
doctor-like vs. lawyer-like vs. neutral) ⫻ 2 (source: doctor vs.
lawyer) ANOVA of the source scores, which yielded a significant
effect of remember— know judgment, F(1, 14) ⫽ 20.80, MSE
⫽.04, p ⬍ .001, ␩2 ⫽ .60, replicating previous findings of better
source identification performance for judgments accompanied by
remember responses than by know response (e.g., Dewhurst &
Hitch, 1999).2 The ANOVA also yielded a significant effect of
statement type, F(2, 28) ⫽ 16.46, MSE ⫽.06, p ⬍ .001, ␩2 ⫽ .54,
and a significant interaction between statement type and source,
F(2, 28) ⫽ 6.63, MSE ⫽.12, p ⬍ .01, ␩2 ⫽ .32, which were
qualified by a significant three-way interaction, F(2, 28) ⫽ 7.47,
MSE ⫽.05, p ⬍ .01, ␩2 ⫽ .35. As seen in Table 3, the three-way
interaction reflects differences in source identification performance in the match and mismatch conditions when participants
responded on the basis of either remember or know judgments.
To examine the three-way interaction, we analyzed source identification performance in the match and mismatch conditions as a
function of remember and know responses. This 2 (match vs.
mismatch) ⫻ 2 (remember vs. know) ANOVA yielded significant
effects of match–mismatch, F(1, 15) ⫽ 8.45, MSE ⫽.10, p ⫽ .01,
␩2 ⫽ .36, and remember– know judgment, F(1, 15) ⫽ 10.69,
MSE ⫽ .02, p ⬍ .01, ␩2 ⫽ .42, as well as a significant interaction,
F(1, 15) ⫽ 10.51, MSE ⫽ .03, p ⬍ .01, ␩2 ⫽ .41. There are much
greater differences in source accuracy between the match and
mismatch conditions when source attributions are based on remember judgments than when they are based on know judgments.
Contrary to the predictions of the prevailing cognitive–social account, source judgments that are based on remembering specific
details do not counteract the influence of stereotypes or minimize
differences in performance between the match and mismatch conditions.

2
The degrees of freedom for this ANOVA are reduced because 3
participants did not give either a remember or a know response to an item
type from one of the sources.

STEREOTYPES AND ILLUSORY RECOLLECTIONS

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Multinomial Analysis of Source Attributions
We further analyzed the overall source attribution data with the
same four-parameter, two-high-threshold multinomial model that
was used by Bayen et al. (2000). This model fit the data from each
item type condition, all G2(2)s ⬍ 2.29, G2(2)critical ⫽ 5.99. As in
Experiment 1 and as observed by Bayen et al. (2000), there were
significant differences across the three different statement types in
the bias parameter to respond with a particular source. The bias to
provide a doctor response was significantly greater for the doctorlike statements (g ⫽ .64) than for the neutral statements (g ⫽ .49),
which was significantly different from the bias for the lawyer-like
statements (g ⫽ .34), all G2(1)s ⬎ 8.01, ps ⬍ .01. Analyses of the
remaining parameter values showed no significant differences in
source memory (d parameter) between the doctor-related (.25) and
lawyer-related (.22) items, although each was significantly lower
than source memory for the neutral items (.75), G2(1)s ⬎ 40.75,
ps ⬍ .001. Lastly, item recognition (D parameter) of the different
item types was no different for doctor-related (.56) and lawyerrelated (.58) items, and each was significantly lower than item
recognition for the neutral items (.75), G2(1)s ⬎ 21.88, ps ⬍ .001.
We replicated the basic results from Experiment 1 as well as the
results of Bayen et al. (2000). Thus, there is nothing unusual either
about our stimuli or about including the remember– know judgment in our source memory test.
Overall, then, the modeling analysis suggests that there is no
actual difference in source memory—as measured by the d parameter—that would account for better source identification performance when there was a match than when there was a mismatch
between the profession of the source and the statement. Instead,
this analysis suggests that there were very strong biases to respond
with the source that matches the content of the statement. For
instance, in the absence of remembering source-identifying information, a bias to provide a doctor response to doctor-like statements would inflate source identification performance when the
doctor happened to be the correct source and reduce performance
when it was not the correct source.
However, one problem with this foregoing modeling analysis is
that it confounds the influence of guessing and illusory recollection processes because both processes can contribute to source
identification errors. In other words, current multinomial models
assume that source identification errors are due to guessing biases
when participants fail to remember information about who presented the item. By contrast, an alternative explanation is that
participants falsely recollect illusory information that then serves
as the basis for their source identification error. From the standpoint of our retrieval expectation account, the observed differences
in the foregoing bias (g) parameter are due to the influence of some
mixture of guessing and illusory recollection processes. To distinguish between these two perspectives, it is necessary to examine
the subjective state that is associated with erroneous source identifications.

Subjective Experience of Correct and Incorrect Source
Attributions
To answer the question about whether erroneous sourcemonitoring judgments are based on either wrong guesses or illusory recollections, we investigated participants’ phenomenological

467

state when they made correct and incorrect source attributions. If
all incorrect source attributions are based on guessing biases when
participants fail to remember source-identifying information, then
there should be similar phenomenological states that are associated
with incorrect source attributions made in either a schemaconsistent manner (e.g., responding with the source who is a doctor
to doctor-related items) or a schema-inconsistent manner (e.g.,
responding with the source who is a doctor to lawyer-related
items). By contrast, if illusory recollections are the basis of erroneous but schema-consistent source attributions, then there should
be higher rates of remember judgments that are given to schemaconsistent than to schema-inconsistent attributions.
Table 4 shows the proportion of doctor and lawyer responses
that were assigned remember judgments. Because all doctor and
lawyer attributions must be accompanied by either a remember or
a know response, the proportion of responses in Table 4, given a
know judgment, is easily computed by subtracting the score from
1. Figure 1 presents the rate of remember and know judgments for
correct and incorrect source attributions that are made in either a
schema-consistent or a schema-inconsistent manner. What is striking about the pattern of data in Figure 1 and in Table 4 is that when
participants make incorrect source attributions, they are much
more likely to give remember judgments to schema-consistent than
to schema-inconsistent attributions. In fact, Figure 1 shows that the
phenomenological experience that is associated with incorrect
attributions that are schema-consistent is nearly identical to the
experience that is associated with correct source attributions that
are schema-consistent.
This foregoing pattern of data was confirmed by a 3 (statement
type: doctor-like vs. lawyer-like vs. neutral) ⫻ 2 (source: doctor
vs. lawyer) ⫻ 2 (accuracy: correct vs. incorrect) ANOVA of the
proportion of source attributions assigned remember judgments.3
This analysis yielded significant effects of statement type, F(2,
30) ⫽ 7.61, MSE ⫽.084, p ⬍ .01, ␩2 ⫽ .34, and accuracy, F(1,
15) ⫽ 22.73, MSE ⫽ .077, p ⬍ .001, ␩2 ⫽ .60, reflecting higher
rates of remember judgments to the neutral statement type and to
correct responses, respectively. There was also a Statement
Type ⫻ Source interaction, F(2, 30) ⫽ 4.24, MSE ⫽.051, p ⬍ .05,
␩2 ⫽ .22, reflecting higher rates of remember responses when the
content of the statement type mismatched rather than matched the
profession of the source. Most importantly, there was a three-way
interaction, F(2, 30) ⫽ 7.68, MSE ⫽.066, p ⬍ .01, ␩2 ⫽ .34.
As is clear from Figure 1, the three-way interaction is fueled by
two aspects of the data. First, when participants make incorrect
source attributions, they report remembering information as a basis
for more than twice as many of the schema-consistent (55%) than
schema-inconsistent (26%) attributions, t(15) ⫽ 3.61, p ⬍ .01.
Second, when participants make correct source attributions, there
are no differences in the rate of remember judgments to schemaconsistent (58%) and schema-inconsistent (52%) attributions,
t(15) ⫽ 1.57. Moreover, the subjective experience of incorrect, but
schema-consistent, source attributions is nearly identical to the

3

Two individuals did not assign remember responses to incorrect responses to an item, hence, the reduced degrees of freedom.

DODSON, DARRAGH, AND WILLIAMS

468

Table 4
Proportion of Correct (in Boldface) and Incorrect Source
Attributions Given A Response of “Remember”

Doctor-related
Doctor
Lawyer
Lawyer-related
Doctor
Lawyer
Neutral
Doctor
Lawyer

“Doctor”

“Lawyer”

.59 (.06)
.51 (.07)

.27 (.07)
.48 (.05)

.55 (.08)
.26 (.07)

.59 (.07)
.58 (.06)

.80 (.02)
.54 (.11)

.48 (.11)
.78 (.04)

Note. Parentheses contain the standard error of the mean.

subjective experience that is associated with correct attributions
that are schema-consistent. For instance, as shown in Table 3,
where the boldface scores refer to correct responses, there is no
significant difference in the rate of remember judgments to lawyer-

100%

90%

Rate of Remember and Know Judgments

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Item type/
Source

related items that were either correctly (58%) or incorrectly (59%)
attributed to the lawyer source, t(15) ⬍ 0.5. The same pattern holds
for the rate of remember judgments assigned to doctor-related
items that were either correctly (59%) or incorrectly (51%) attributed to the doctor source, t(15) ⬍ 1.16.
One potential explanation of the difference in subjective experience for the schema-consistent and schema-inconsistent incorrect
source attributions is that participants use a more lenient criterion
for making remember judgments to schema-consistent items than
to schema-inconsistent items. If this were the case, however, then
when participants falsely recognize new items as having been
encountered during the study phase, they should make more remember judgments to schema-consistent attributions (e.g., responding with the source who is a doctor to doctor-related items)
than to schema-inconsistent attributions (e.g., responding with the
source who is a doctor to lawyer-related items). As is visible in the
right-hand portion of Figure 1, this was not the case. In fact, the
opposite pattern was true when making source attributions to new
items: Participants gave a higher proportion of remember responses to schema-inconsistent attributions (21%) than to schema-

80%

70%

60%
Know
Remember

50%

40%

30%

20%

10%

0%
SchemaConsistent

SchemaInconsistent

Correct Source Attributions

SchemaConsistent

SchemaInconsistent

Incorrect Source
Attributions

Studied Items

SchemaConsistent

SchemaInconsistent

Incorrect Source
Attributions
New Items

Figure 1. Rate of remember and know judgments in Experiment 2 to correct and incorrect source attributions
that are made to either the schema-consistent or the schema-inconsistent source. Vertical lines indicate the
standard error of the mean.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

STEREOTYPES AND ILLUSORY RECOLLECTIONS

consistent attributions (13%), although this difference was not
significant, t(13) ⬍ 1.4 Thus, these data rule out a lenient-criterion
account of why there are higher levels of remember judgments for
incorrect source attributions that are made in a schema-consistent
manner than for those made in a schema-inconsistent manner.
In sum, it is not the case that all incorrect source attributions are
driven by (a) failing to remember individuating information and
(b) guessing in a schema-consistent manner. Instead, a substantial
amount of incorrect but stereotype-consistent source attributions
are based on illusory recollections. Simply being told the profession of the two sources at the time of retrieval spontaneously
creates distorted and stereotype-consistent recollections about who
presented a statement. This means that recollecting specific details
about past events cannot counteract or minimize the influence of
stereotypes in this paradigm because these recollected details may
themselves be distorted by the stereotype.

Experiment 3
Experiments 1 and 2 indicate that illusory recollections about
the origin of a statement can be created by providing stereotype
information at retrieval that draws on well-learned semantic categories about doctors and lawyers.
There are a variety of different explanations for the occurrence
of illusory recollections. In other paradigms, misattribution of
strong familiarity is a plausible explanation for illusory recollections (i.e., false remember responses). For instance, in the Deese–
Roediger–McDermott (DRM) paradigm, participants tend to give
high rates of remember responses to new words (e.g., sleep) that
appear familiar because they are semantically related to what was
studied (e.g., tired, dream, pillow, rest; Roediger & McDermott,
1995). More recently, Chan and McDermott (2006) observed a
similar effect when participants make pragmatic inference errors.
For instance, after hearing that a “flimsy shelf weakened under the
weight of the books,” participants later often incorrectly recognize
that they had heard the word broke and give high levels of
remember responses to this false recognition. Drawing on the
signal detection account of Wixted and Stretch (2004; see also
Donaldson, 1996), Chan and McDermott suggested that the high
rates of false remember responses may be due to the misattribution
of strong familiarity. According to Wixted and Stretch (2004),
participants make remember and know responses on the basis of a
single dimension of memory strength, which is based on the
overall amount of information that is provided by separate remember and familiarity processes. Consequently, a remember response
can be due to the presence of (a) a large amount of remember
information and little familiarity information, (b) a large amount of
familiarity information and little remember information, or (c) a
large amount of both kinds of information. Thus, from this point of
view, in both the DRM and pragmatic-inference paradigms, the
strong familiarity that is associated with the semantically related
lure items on the test may account for erroneous remember responses.
This misattribution of strong familiarity account, however, cannot easily explain the false remember responses in the present
paradigm. In contrast to the foregoing paradigms in which participants incorrectly endorse new words as old, in our paradigm
participants must attribute items that are already recognized as old
to one source or the other and give a remember or know response

469

as a basis for this source attribution. To explain the high levels of
false remember responses to erroneous source attributions, the
misattribution of familiarity account must predict that items are
more familiar when participants respond in a schema-consistent
manner than when they respond in a schema-inconsistent manner
(e.g., higher familiarity when incorrectly providing a doctor response to the doctor-related items than when incorrectly providing
a doctor response to the lawyer-related items). There was no
support for this prediction. If there had been differences in familiarity between the items, then this would have produced differences in item recognition. However, recognition rates—as measured by the D parameter, which is equivalent to a corrected
recognition score—were no different for the doctor-related and
lawyer-related items when they were presented by either a mismatching or matching source. Yet, despite the absence of these
memory differences, there were strong differences in the pattern of
illusory recollections. Thus, there is no support for a misattribution
of familiarity account of these data.
By contrast, fuzzy trace theory provides a compelling explanation for our results (e.g., Brainerd, Wright, Reyna, & Mojardin,
2001; 2003). According to this theory, the encoding phase produces two representations for each item: a verbatim representation
captures the sensory and perceptual details about the item (e.g.,
visual information about the face of the source with which it is
associated), whereas a gist representation captures the meaning of
the item. In the present paradigm, repeated exposure to the doctorrelated and lawyer-related items will create very strong gist representations for the meaning of these two themes. Fuzzy trace
theory suggests that phantom (i.e., illusory) recollections can occur
in the following manner. First, the theory predicts that the rapid
disintegration of verbatim traces will leave behind fragments of
information that are no longer bound together, such as a memory
for the picture of the doctor source that is unconnected to the
statement with which it was initially paired. The second critical
prediction about the construction of phantom recollections is that
strong gist memories will redintegrate verbatim fragments to produce gist-consistent recollective experiences. For instance, encountering a lawyer-related statement on the test will activate a
strong gist memory for this theme, which will then attract and
incorporate unconnected verbatim fragments about the lawyer
source so as to construct a schema-consistent illusory source
recollection.
Overall, then, fuzzy trace theory easily explains the presence of
false remember responses to erroneous source attributions with the
mechanism that strong gist traces produce schema (i.e., gist)consistent illusory source recollections. Moreover, it explains the
absence of differences in item recognition—and presumably, familiarity—with the assumption that the strength of the gist traces
for the doctor-related and lawyer-related items is unaffected by
whether they were presented by the doctor source or the lawyer
source.
Experiment 3 tests fuzzy trace theory and our retrieval expectation account. To distinguish between these two accounts, we
modified the paradigm in Experiment 2 and created another ex4

Given the low false alarm rate to new items, 4 individuals did not
produce a false alarm to either one or both types of new item.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

470

DODSON, DARRAGH, AND WILLIAMS

pectation about the likely source of the statements that is independent of the expectations associated with the gist of the statements.
In this experiment, we used the identical materials and procedure from Experiment 2 but manipulated the proportion of items
presented by the two sources. The neutral proportion condition
replicated Experiment 2 and included equal amounts of the doctorrelated and lawyer-related items from each source. By contrast, in
the conflicting proportion condition, only 25% of the items that
each source presents were stereotype consistent and 75% were
stereotype inconsistent. For example, 25% of the items that the
doctor source presented were doctor-related and 75% of the items
were lawyer-related. Thus, in each proportion condition, participants encountered equivalent numbers of doctor-related and
lawyer-related items. The only difference between the proportion
conditions was how these items were distributed between the two
sources. Previous studies show that manipulating the proportion of
items that are presented from one source or another changes
participants’ expectations about the origin of a memory (e.g., Cook
et al., 2003; Dodson & Johnson, 1996).
Experiment 3 allowed us to test different predictions of fuzzy
trace theory and the retrieval expectation account. According to
fuzzy trace theory, illusory (phantom) recollections are created
when strong gist traces attract unconnected verbatim fragments to
produce gist-consistent illusory recollections. From our interpretation of this theory, there does not appear to be a mechanism
whereby gist traces would attract verbatim fragments that are
inconsistent with the meaning of the gist trace. In other words,
gist-consistent illusory recollections should always be more likely
than gist-inconsistent illusory recollections. Therefore, fuzzy trace
theory predicts that the proportion manipulation will have no effect
on the pattern of false remember responses. That is, in both the
neutral proportion and conflicting proportion conditions, the pattern of false remember responses should be schema (i.e., gist)consistent and correspond to the pattern of false remember responses in Experiment 2.
By contrast, the retrieval expectation account predicts that false
remember responses are created by any relevant expectation that is
prominent during the act of retrieval. Thus, this account predicts
that the conflicting proportion condition will completely reverse
the pattern of false remember responses that is observed in the
neutral proportion condition. Specifically, the neutral proportion
condition should produce schema-consistent false remember responses—as it did in Experiment 2— but the conflicting proportion
condition should produce schema-inconsistent false remember responses. This outcome would indicate that the illusory recollections that are stereotype-based can be completely reversed by
another overriding set of expectations.
In short, fuzzy trace theory and the retrieval expectation account
make opposite predictions about the pattern of false remember
responses in the conflicting proportion condition: Fuzzy trace
theory predicts that they will be schema consistent, whereas the
retrieval expectation account predicts that they will be proportion
consistent and, thus, schema inconsistent.
One remaining crucial aspect of this experiment concerns the
remember instructions. The definition of remember in the instructions from Experiment 2 (which are the standard instructions in the
literature) is sufficiently broad that it is possible that idiosyncratic,
but non–source-specifying, details might be recollected and lead to
a remember response. For instance, upon seeing a particular test

item, participants may not remember any source-identifying details
about who presented the item during the study phase, but they may
vividly remember how they felt when they saw the item or that
their stomach grumbled, which might then contribute to a remember response. To eliminate the possibility of these source-irrelevant
and noncriterial remember judgments, we used a definition of
remember that is similar to the manner in which we instructed
participants to make a response of Tom or Bill in Experiment 1.
We instructed participants to give remember responses only when
they were aware of specific details that identified one source or the
other as the origin of the test item.

Method
Participants
Forty-eight undergraduate students from the University of Virginia participated in this experiment, with 24 participants in each
of the two conditions.

Design and Materials
Except for the noted differences, the overall design and materials were identical to those used in Experiment 2. The stimuli
consisted of 96 sentences, with 48 containing doctor-related information and 48 containing lawyer-related information. There were
no neutral statements in this experiment. Each group of 48 sentences was divided into six subgroups (i.e., with 8 sentences per
subgroup) that served to counterbalance the statements across: (a)
the doctor, lawyer, and new sources and (b) the two proportion
conditions. During the encoding phase, participants were presented
with 64 statements. In the neutral proportion condition, 32 of these
statements were presented by the stereotype-consistent source and
32 statements were presented by the stereotype-inconsistent source
(e.g., the doctor source presented 16 of the doctor-related items
and 16 of the lawyer-related items). By contrast, in the conflicting
proportion condition, 48 of the profession statements were presented by the stereotype-inconsistent source and 16 statements
were presented by the consistent source (e.g., the doctor source
presented 24 of the lawyer-related items and 8 of the doctor-related
items, and the lawyer source presented 24 of the doctor-related
items and 8 of the lawyer-related items). The test contained all 96
statements (64 old items and 32 new items). All other details were
identical to the those presented in the Method section of Experiment 2.

Procedure
During the study phase, as in the preceding experiments, participants were told that they would see sentences that were associated with the name and picture of one of two men, Tom and Bill.
Participants rated how easily they could imagine the pictured
person saying the associated sentence. Participants were not informed of either the impending memory test or the proportion of
doctor-related and lawyer-related sentences that were presented by
the two sources. During the test phase, as in the previous experiments, participants were told that it might be helpful to know that
one source is actually a doctor and the other source is actually a
lawyer. In addition, participants in the conflicting proportion condition were informed about the proportion manipulation. They

STEREOTYPES AND ILLUSORY RECOLLECTIONS

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

were told that they might have noticed that “Tom presented most
of the lawyer-related statements and Bill presented most of the
doctor-related statements.” Finally, as in the prior experiments, the
name, photo, and assigned profession (e.g., Tom, doctor) of each
source were shown throughout the test.
The format of the memory test was identical to the format used
in Experiment 2. Participants responded either Tom, Bill, or new
to each test item and, contingent on a response of either Tom or
Bill, participants identified the basis of their source identification
by giving a remember or know response. However, we changed
the instructions slightly for giving a remember response. We
directed participants to make remember responses in instances in
which their
memory of who originally presented the statement is accompanied by
a conscious recollection of its prior occurrence in the list of studied
statements. Remember is the ability to become consciously aware
again of some aspect of how the sentence was presented, such as
aspects of the physical appearance of the sentence and the accompanying picture of Bill or Tom. In other words the “remembered”
answer should bring back to mind a particular visual image or recollective details of the statement and its presenter.

By contrast, participants were directed to give know judgments
when “you recognize that the sentence was in the study set but you
cannot consciously recollect anything about its actual occurrence
and how it was presented.”

Results and Discussion
Table 5 presents the conditional source scores for the studied
items overall and broken down in terms of source scores for

Table 5
Source Identification Scores Overall and for Remember and
Know Judgments in the Neutral Proportion and Conflicting
Proportion Conditions
Item type/
Source

Overall

Remember

Know

Neutral proportion condition
Doctor-related
Doctor
Lawyer
Lawyer-related
Doctor
Lawyer

remember judgments and for know judgments. We first examined
the overall source scores without regard to whether they were
based on remember or know responses. A 2 (statement type:
doctor-like vs. lawyer-like) ⫻ 2 (source: doctor vs. lawyer) ⫻ 2
(proportion: neutral vs. conflicting) ANOVA revealed a significant
three-way interaction, F(1, 46) ⫽ 19.90, MSE ⫽.229, p ⬍ .001,
␩2 ⫽ .30, and no other significant effects (all Fs ⬍ 1.25). The
three-way interaction is easily visible in the left column of data in
the table. The neutral proportion condition shows the standard
match–mismatch effect that was observed in Experiments 1 and 2:
Source scores were higher when the profession of the source and
the content of the statement matched (.75) than when they mismatched (.44), F(1, 46) ⫽ 5.03, p ⬍ .05, ␩2 ⫽ .10. By contrast, the
conflicting proportion condition showed the exact opposite pattern: Source scores were higher when there was a mismatch (.77)
than when there was a match (.46) between the profession of the
source and the content of the statement, F(1, 46) ⫽ 4.92, p ⬍ .05,
␩2 ⫽ .10. These results show that the stereotype-based match–
mismatch effect can be reversed easily by changing expectations
about the likelihood that a particular source is associated with a
particular kind of content.
We next examined source identification performance that is
associated with remember and know responses when there is either
a match or a mismatch between the content of the statement and
the profession of the source. A 2 (remember vs. know) ⫻ 2 (match
vs. mismatch) ⫻ 2 (proportion: neutral vs. conflicting) ANOVA of
the source scores showed a significant effect of remember– know,
reflecting higher overall performance for remember responses than
for know responses, F(1, 44) ⫽ 21.03, MSE ⫽.045, p ⬍ .001,
␩2 ⫽ .32.5 There was also a significant interaction between the
match–mismatch and proportion manipulations, F(1, 44) ⫽ 20.94,
MSE ⫽ .218, p ⬍ .001, ␩2 ⫽ .32, indicating, as in the prior
analysis, that the match–mismatch effect was reversed in the
conflicting proportion condition. There were no other significant
effects (all Fs ⬍ 1). One key point about this analysis is that even
when participants claimed to be responding on the basis of remembering specific source-identifying details, they were still just as
influenced by the match–mismatch manipulation as when they
were responding in the absence of remembering source information (i.e., know judgments).

.76 (.04)
.45 (.06)

.88 (.04)
.48 (.09)

.63 (.07)
.45 (.09)

Multinomial Analysis of Source Attributions

.43 (.06)
.73 (.04)

.54 (.09)
.76 (.07)

.26 (.07)
.69 (.08)

As we did in the prior experiments, we also analyzed the source
attribution data with multinomial models. To focus the comparison
on the difference between the neutral proportion condition and the
conflicting proportion condition, we constructed a single model for
each proportion condition. As seen in Table 6, the best-fitting
model for each proportion condition consisted of separate source
bias (g) parameters and separate item recognition (D) parameters for
the doctor-related and lawyer-related items. Each model also contained a single source discrimination (d) parameter, and a single false
alarm guessing (b) parameter for both item types. Both models pro-

Conflicting proportion condition
Doctor-related
Doctor
Lawyer
Lawyer-related
Doctor
Lawyer

471

.43 (.06)
.78 (.06)

.45 (.09)
.82 (.08)

.32 (.09)
.75 (.08)

.75 (.06)
.48 (.06)

.82 (.08)
.59 (.11)

.69 (.08)
.47 (.10)

Note. In the neutral proportion condition, each source presented equal
amounts of doctor-related and lawyer-related items. In the conflicting
proportion condition, each source presented 75% of the items that are
stereotype inconsistent (e.g., doctor source presented 75% of the lawyerrelated items). Parentheses contain the standard error of the mean.

5
Two participants in the neutral proportion condition never used either
a remember or a know response for any of the items, which accounts for
the reduced degrees of freedom in this analysis.

DODSON, DARRAGH, AND WILLIAMS

472
Table 6
Parameter Estimates From Experiment 3

Subjective Experience of Correct and Incorrect Source
Attributions
Proportion condition

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Parameter (cognitive process)
Source guessing bias
g_doc
g_law
Item recognition
D_doc
D_law
Source discrimination: (d)
Old–new guessing bias (b)
G2 (6)

Neutral

Conflicting

.67
.28

.27
.70

.53
.41
.30
.42
8.54

.53
.38
.36
.45
9.75

Note. g_doc and g_law refer to the bias to respond “doctor” for the doctorrelated and lawyer-related items, respectively; D_doc and D_law refer to the
probability of correctly detecting the doctor-related and lawyer-related items,
respectively; d refers to the probability of correctly discriminating the source
of the item; b refers to the bias to recognize an item as old. G2 (6) values less
than 12.59 indicate a good fit of the model to the data.

vided adequate fits to the data, both G2(6)s ⬍ 9.76, G2(6)critical ⫽
12.59. As in Experiment 2, within the neutral proportion condition,
the bias to provide a doctor response was significantly greater for the
doctor-related statements (g ⫽ .67) than for the lawyer-related statements (g ⫽ .28), G2(1) ⫽ 134.26, p ⬍ .00001. However, there was no
difference in source discrimination for the two different item types
(i.e., d ⫽ .30 for both statement types). The conflicting condition
showed a similar effect: no difference in source discrimination for the
two different item types (i.e., d ⫽ .36 for both statement types) but a
stronger bias to give a doctor response for the lawyer-like statements
(g ⫽ .70) than for the doctor-like statements (g ⫽ .27), G2(1) ⫽
132.49, p ⬍ .00001.
Most importantly, when comparing the neutral proportion condition against the conflicting proportion condition, the only difference occurred with the source bias (g) parameter. The tendency to
respond in a schema-consistent manner in the neutral condition
was completely reversed in the conflicting condition. For instance,
the bias to give a doctor response to the doctor-related items was
significantly stronger in the neutral proportion condition (g ⫽ .67)
than in the conflicting proportion condition (g ⫽ .27), G2(1) ⫽
135.63, p ⬍ .00001. Likewise, there was a much weaker bias to
give a doctor response to the lawyer-like statements in the neutral
condition (g ⫽ .28) than in the conflicting condition (.70), G2(1) ⫽
142.89, p ⬍ .00001. By contrast, there was no difference between
the neutral and conflicting proportion conditions for any of the
other parameters, all G2(1)s ⬍ 1.
Overall, then, the results are as expected. Manipulating the
proportion of items that are presented by one source or the other
had no effect on either item recognition or source discrimination,
but it had a massive effect on the bias to respond with one source
or the other. However, the key question that this analysis cannot
answer is how is the proportion manipulation producing this
change in the bias parameter? In other words, do the large changes
in the bias parameter across the two proportion conditions reflect
changes in illusory recollections, changes in strategic guessing, or
some combination of these two processes?

The fundamental point of this experiment concerns the subjective experience for erroneous source attributions in the neutral
proportion and conflicting proportion conditions. If illusory recollections are caused either by well-learned semantic categories or
by the capacity of strong gist traces to attract gist-consistent
verbatim details, then we should observe a similar pattern of false
remember responses in both proportion conditions: higher rates of
false remember judgments to incorrect source attributions that are
schema-consistent than to those that are schema-inconsistent. By
contrast, if illusory recollections are influenced by expectations
about the likelihood of a particular source presenting a particular
kind of item, then we should observe higher schema-consistent
false remember responses in the neutral proportion condition but
higher schema-inconsistent (i.e., proportion consistent) false remember responses in the conflicting proportion condition.
A 2 (response: stereotype consistent vs. stereotype inconsistent) ⫻ 2 (correct vs. incorrect) ⫻ 2 (proportion: neutral vs.
conflicting) ANOVA of the proportion of source attributions that
were assigned remember judgments produced a significant effect
of correct–incorrect responses, F(1, 37) ⫽ 14.69, MSE ⫽.066, p ⬍
.001, ␩2 ⫽ .28, with higher rates of remember judgments for
correct than for incorrect responses.6 There was also a three-way
interaction, F(1, 37) ⫽ 17.03, MSE ⫽ .033, p ⬍ .001, ␩2 ⫽ .32,
but no other significant effects (all Fs ⬍ 1.13).
The three-way interaction is visible in Figure 2. As seen in the
top half of Figure 2, when participants make correct source attributions, there are no differences in the two proportion conditions
in the subjective state of remembering that are associated with
source attributions that are either schema consistent or schema
inconsistent (both ts ⬍ 1.74, ps ⬎ .28). By contrast, as shown in
the bottom half of Figure 2, when participants make incorrect
source attributions, there are very different patterns of false remember responses in the two proportion conditions. In the neutral
proportion condition (i.e., each source presents equal numbers of
doctor-related and lawyer-related items), when participants make
incorrect source attributions, they are more often in a subjective
state of remembering when these attributions are schema consistent (.42) than when they are schema inconsistent (.30), t(18) ⫽
3.44, p ⬍ .01. However, the exact opposite pattern is visible in the
conflicting proportion condition. Here, when participants make
incorrect source attributions, they give higher rates of remember
responses to schema-inconsistent attributions (.52) than to schemaconsistent attributions (.32), t(19) ⫽ 2.23, p ⬍ .05. These data
exactly fit the predictions of our retrieval expectation account.
Overall, then, the proportion manipulation selectively affects the
phenomenological experience that is associated with incorrect
source attributions. Critically, and consistent with the predictions
of our retrieval expectation account, the false remember responses
correspond to the expectations established by the proportion manipulation. For erroneous source attributions in the conflicting
proportion condition, there are higher rates of false remember
responses to schema-inconsistent attributions than to the schema6
Four participants in the conflicting proportion condition and 5 individuals in the neutral proportion condition made either no incorrect or no
correct responses for a particular item.

STEREOTYPES AND ILLUSORY RECOLLECTIONS

473

100%

Rate of Remember and Know Judgments

80%
70%
60%
Know

50%

Remember

40%
30%
20%
10%
0%
Schema-Consistent

SchemaInconsistent

Neutral-Proportion

Schema-Consistent

SchemaInconsistent

Conflicting-Proportion

Correct Source Attributions

100%
90%
Rate of Remember and Know Judgments

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

90%

80%
70%
60%

Know

50%

Remember

40%
30%
20%
10%
0%
Schema-Consistent

SchemaInconsistent

Neutral-Proportion

Schema-Consistent

SchemaInconsistent

Conflicting-Proportion

Incorrect Source Attributions

Figure 2. Rate of remember and know judgments in Experiment 3 to correct (top panel) and incorrect (bottom
panel) source attributions that are made to either the schema-consistent or to the schema-inconsistent source. In the
neutral proportion condition, each source presents equal amounts of doctor-related and lawyer-related items, whereas
in the conflicting proportion condition, each source presents 75% of the items that are schema inconsistent (e.g., the
doctor source presents 75% of the lawyer-related items). Vertical lines indicate the standard error of the mean.

DODSON, DARRAGH, AND WILLIAMS

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

474

consistent attributions, whereas the opposite pattern occurs in the
neutral proportion condition.
Can a criterion account explain these differences in subjective
states? For example, in the neutral proportion condition, are participants generally more likely to assign remember judgments to
stereotype-consistent attributions than to stereotype-inconsistent
attributions? We investigated this question, as we did in Experiment 2, by examining how often participants give remember
judgments to the doctor-related new items and lawyer-related new
items that are falsely recognized and are attributed to either the
doctor or the lawyer source. In the neutral proportion condition,
there were no significant differences in the proportion of remember judgments that were assigned to new items that were falsely
attributed to either a stereotype-consistent (.32) or a stereotypeinconsistent (.47) source, t(13) ⫽ 1.44.7 As in Experiment 2, the
trend is in a direction that is opposite the predictions of the
criterion account: Participants more often gave remember judgments to new items that were attributed to the stereotypeinconsistent source than to new items attributed to the stereotypeconsistent source. Similarly, in the conflicting proportion
condition, there were no significant differences in the proportion of
remember judgments that were assigned to new items that were
falsely attributed to either a stereotype-consistent (.33) or a
stereotype-inconsistent (.39) source, t(12) ⬍ 1.8 Overall, then, as
we observed in Experiment 2, there is no support for a lenientcriterion explanation of the pattern of illusory recollections.
There is an alternative interpretation of Experiment 3 that is consistent with fuzzy trace theory. This interpretation assumes that two
different kinds of gist representations are created in this experiment.
An item-gist representation refers to the meaning of the doctor-related
and lawyer-related items. By contrast, a source-gist representation
refers to the meaning or characteristics of the two sources that are
derived from the proportion of items that each source presents. For
instance, in the conflicting proportion condition, participants may
develop gist representations about the fact that one source tended to
present doctor-related materials and the other source tended to present
lawyer-related material. If this source-gist representation is sufficiently strong to produce illusory/phantom recollections, then fuzzy
trace theory may be able to explain these results. Specifically, fuzzy
trace theory would argue that in the conflicting proportion condition,
the source-gist representation produces phantom recollections that, in
turn, contribute to a higher rate of false remember responses to the
schema-inconsistent attributions than to the schema-consistent attributions. However, because there are two different kinds of gist representations that potentially produce opposite patterns of behavior,
what remains to be specified in fuzzy trace theory is how it is that one
kind of gist representation can dominate performance over another
kind of gist representation.
In sum, this experiment shows that expectations that are established on the fly from noting the frequency that a kind of statement
was presented from a particular person are sufficient to produce
illusory recollections.

person was actually a doctor and the other was a lawyer, there was
a strong tendency to remember and attribute the test items in a
stereotype-consistent manner, such as incorrectly responding that
the doctor presented the majority of the doctor-related sentences.
One of the essential questions of this article is whether guessing
processes or illusory recollections are the basis for these erroneous
source attributions. The standard explanation of this kind of data is
that expectations and stereotypes alter an individual’s strategy for
evaluating remembered information so that individuals are prone to
guess in a stereotype-consistent manner, particularly when they fail to
recollect specific information about who initially presented the item.
We show that this standard account is incorrect. When stereotypes and expectations are activated at retrieval, they create illusory recollections, which make a vital contribution to source
attributions. In both Experiment 2 and in the neutral proportion
condition of Experiment 3, participants often reported “remembering” specific details to justify incorrect source attributions that
were made to the stereotype-consistent source (e.g., responding
with the source who is a doctor to doctor-related items). By
contrast, participants in these conditions frequently used know
responses to justify erroneous source attributions that were made
to the stereotype-inconsistent source. It is worth noting that our
studies differ from typical investigations of schemas, stereotypes,
and expectations in that we only activated the profession stereotype at retrieval, whereas in most studies the stereotype, schema, or
expectation is present at encoding. Thus, we have shown how
retrieval conditions can produce illusory recollections.
These experiments rule out a number of alternative explanations for
the occurrence of illusory recollections. Both Experiments 2 and 3
show that a lenient-criterion account for making false remember
responses is not a viable explanation of the data. This lenient criterion
account suggests that participants are more likely to make remember
judgments when responding in a stereotype-consistent manner than
when responding in a stereotype-inconsistent manner. Thus, this account predicts that when participants falsely recognize new items,
they should give more remember judgments to stereotype-consistent
attributions than to stereotype-inconsistent attributions. This was not
the case. In both Experiment 2 and Experiment 3, there were no
differences in the rate at which participants gave remember judgments
to new items that were attributed to the stereotype-consistent and
stereotype-inconsistent sources.
Another potential explanation of the false remember responses
is that they are a byproduct of the misattribution of strong familiarity, which has served as a plausible account in other paradigms
(e.g., Chan & McDermott, 2006). In the present paradigm, in order
to explain the high levels of false remember responses to erroneous, but stereotype-consistent, source attributions, the misattribution of familiarity account must predict higher levels of familiarity
for these items than for items that elicit erroneous but stereotypeinconsistent source attributions. Higher levels of familiarity would
contribute to higher recognition rates. But, there were no differences in recognition rates for the doctor-related and lawyer-related

General Discussion

7
Given the low false alarm rates to the new items, there were 10
participants who did not produce a false alarm to either the doctor-related
new items or the lawyer-related new items.
8
Given the low false alarm rates to the new items, there were 11
participants who did not produce a false alarm to either the doctor-related
new items or the lawyer-related new items.

In these experiments, participants initially studied two people
presenting lawyer-related (e.g., “you face a fine”), doctor-related
(e.g., “you have a fever”), and profession-neutral sentences. When
participants were told, on a subsequent memory test, that one

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

STEREOTYPES AND ILLUSORY RECOLLECTIONS

items when they were presented by either a stereotype-consistent
or a stereotype-inconsistent source. Therefore, there is no support
for an explanation of the false remember responses that is based on
the misattribution of strong familiarity.
Fuzzy trace theory has successfully explained the occurrence of
illusory recollections in a variety of different paradigms. This
theory predicts that phantom (i.e., illusory) recollections are created when strong gist traces attract and incorporate unconnected
verbatim fragments into a gist-consistent illusory recollection (e.g.,
Brainerd et al., 2001; 2003). This theory easily explains the
stereotype-consistent false remember data from Experiments 1 and
2. Repeated exposure to the doctor-related and lawyer-related
items creates strong gist memories for these two themes, which
then attract stereotype-consistent contextual details about these
items, thus explaining why participants report remembering details
to justify erroneous source attributions.
Experiment 3, however, suggests that illusory recollections in
this paradigm may not be caused by strong gist traces or by
well-learned schemas about items. This experiment created an
expectation about the likely source of items by manipulating the
proportion of profession items that were presented by each source.
In the neutral proportion condition, each source presented equal
amounts of the doctor-related and lawyer-related items, whereas in
the conflicting proportion condition, each source presented 75% of
the items that were stereotype inconsistent and conflicted with the
profession of the source (e.g., the doctor source presented 75% of
the lawyer-related items). We observed that in the neutral proportion condition, the false remember responses were primarily stereotype consistent, as in Experiment 2. By contrast, in the
conflicting-proportion condition, the false remember responses
were primarily stereotype inconsistent but proportion consistent.
Even though participants had built up equivalently strong gist
traces for the themes of the items in the two proportion conditions,
there were opposite patterns of illusory recollections in these two
conditions. However, our interpretation assumes that participants
do not form gist representations about the proportion of items that
each source presents. If they do, and if these source gist representations are sufficiently strong, then fuzzy trace theory may be able
to explain these results.
Overall, then, the data suggest that any expectation that is salient
during the act of retrieval is sufficient to create illusory recollections
that are consistent with this expectation. In Experiments 1 and 2, the
salient expectation was established by the individual’s general knowledge about doctors and lawyers. By contrast, in Experiment 3, the
expectation was created by the likelihood that a particular item was
associated with a particular source. More generally, these results
suggest that any set of preconceptions is sufficient to make an individual vulnerable to recollecting—rightly or wrongly—specific details that are consistent with these expectations.
However, it is important to emphasize that if expectations alone
were all that mattered, then we should have observed the same
pattern of results for source attributions to new items that were
falsely recognized as old as we did for erroneous source attributions to old items. This was not the case. In both Experiments 2
and 3, the false remember responses for source attributions to new
items were not affected by either the schema-expectations manipulation or the proportion manipulation. Consequently, the mechanism that is contributing to illusory recollections is not purely a
retrieval phenomenon. Instead, a preexisting memory trace appears

475

to be a requirement. Although the exact mechanism remains to be
specified, we suggest that expectations during retrieval influence
the specification of the retrieval cue so that participants tend to
seek out and activate expectation-confirming information, which is
combined with activated information from the memory trace to
produce an expectation-consistent illusory recollection.
Our account has much in common with the accessibility account
of B. K. Payne et al. (2004). Using a similar paradigm, Payne et al.
observed a pattern of biased memory performance involving racial
stereotypes. Their participants read a list of stereotypically Black
and White names. Each category of names was associated in equal
amounts with either a stereotypically Black or White occupation.
On a subsequent memory test, when given the name as a cue to
remember the associated occupation, participants showed a clear
pattern of stereotypically related memory errors: Incorrect responses were more likely to be stereotype consistent than stereotype inconsistent. Payne et al. used a multinomial model, derived
from Jacoby’s (1991) process dissociation approach, to explain the
pattern of performance. They observed that stereotypes selectively
affected the accessibility bias parameter of their model. Importantly, their bias parameter does not reflect strategic guessing but
rather measures an unconscious accessibility to stereotype information. B. K. Payne et al. (2004) suggested that stereotypes
increase the likelihood of information coming “to mind not because of prior exposure but because it is related to other information organized within a stereotype schema” (p. 55). We also
suggest that stereotypes and expectations bring information to
mind, which produces an illusory recollection.
The crucial difference between our expectation account and B. K.
Payne et al. (2004) accessibility account depends, in part, on how each
account characterizes the phenomenal characteristics of the
expectation-consistent information that is brought to mind. Payne et
al. suggested that this information is unconscious and implicitly biases
performance, which, these authors suggest, is why it is difficult to
consciously oppose the influence of these biases. By contrast, we
suggest that this information is consciously accessible and is phenomenally similar to veridical recollections, which is why our participants
had difficulty in Experiment 1 “gating out” incorrect responses so as
to reduce the impact of stereotypes (i.e., they had trouble distinguishing correct from incorrect recollections). However, the strongest evidence for the conscious accessibility of this expectation-consistent
information is that it causes participants to justify erroneous source
attributions on the basis of a conscious recollection (e.g., in Experiments 2 and 3, the higher false remember responses for incorrect, but
schema-consistent, source attributions than for schema-inconsistent
source attributions).
The occurrence of stereotype-provoked illusory recollections
shows that there is not always an inverse relationship between the
influence of stereotypes and the process of recollecting specific
individuating information, contrary to many social psychological
theories (e.g., Kunda & Thagard, 1996; Macrae & Bodenhausen,
2000; Spears & Haslam, 1997). In other words, recollection cannot
always combat the influence of stereotypes when recollection itself
is a process that is vulnerable to distortion.
A full accounting of the effects of stereotypes, expectations, and
general knowledge on performance requires the roles of both
illusory recollections and strategic guessing processes. Although
Experiments 2 and 3 indicate that there is not an inverse relationship between the influences of stereotypes and recollection (i.e.,

DODSON, DARRAGH, AND WILLIAMS

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

476

recollection did not counteract the influence of stereotypes), there
is much evidence documenting an inverse relationship between
recollection and strategic guessing processes (e.g., Collins, Warnock, Aiello & Miller, 1975; Dodson & Schacter, 2002; Hicks &
Marsh, 1999; Johnson, Raye, Foley, & Foley, 1981; Schacter,
Israel, & Racine, 1999). For instance, individuals can use a decision strategy—the distinctiveness heuristic—to reject false memories when they fail to recollect expected information about a test
item (e.g., Dodson & Schacter, 2002; Gallo, Weiss, & Schacter,
2004; Schacter et al., 1999). Stereotypes can fuel a similar inferential decision process so that participants guess in a stereotypeconsistent manner when they fail to remember specific information. The SMF is perhaps the best model of the interplay between
decision processes and recollective experience (e.g., Johnson et al.,
1993). According to this framework, individuals can flexibly
weight recollective information and other decision processes depending on the rememberer’s goals and knowledge (e.g., if we
happened to be participants in the paradigm in this article, then we
would be hesitant to weight heavily recollective information given
the occurrence of illusory recollections). In other words, the SMF
predicts that although there is often an inverse relationship between recollective experience and the use of strategic guessing
processes— given the typically higher diagnostic value of the
former than the latter—this will not always be the case, particularly in situations where individuals are made aware of the unreliability of their recollections.
One final implication of these results concerns multinomial models
of source monitoring (e.g., Batchelder & Riefer, 1990, 1999). All
multinomial models of source monitoring, including those of one of
the present study authors (e.g., Dodson, Holland, & Shimamura,
1998; Dodson & Shimamura, 2000), assume that erroneous source
attributions are based entirely on the influence of guessing biases
when participants fail to recollect source information. We have shown
that this assumption is incorrect. Thus, a question of paramount
importance for multinomial modelers of source memory is whether it
is possible to develop a model that can separate the influence of
illusory recollections from guessing processes.

Conclusion
These experiments show that we are trapped by our experiences
and expectations so that we tend to falsely recollect details that
support our preconceptions. As long as we are prone to misremembering the past on the basis of the perspective of the present,
then there are problematic implications for minimizing the influence of stereotypes. When presented with new information at
retrieval about who was a doctor and who was a lawyer, participants spontaneously misrecollected that the wrong person presented a statement when the statement was consistent with expectations about what a doctor or a lawyer would say. These results
suggest that other stereotypes, such as those about race and gender,
also will create subjectively compelling and yet illusory recollections that are consistent with the stereotype. However, the difficulty of distinguishing true recollections from false recollections
will serve to maintain the influence of stereotypes. In other words,
the influence of illusory recollections cannot be easily combated
by using counter stereotypical decision processes, as we naturally—and sometimes wrongly—infer that what we are recollecting
is a faithful reflection of the past.

References
Batchelder, W. H., & Riefer, D. M. (1990). Multinomial processing models
of source monitoring. Psychological Review, 97, 548 –564.
Batchelder, W. H., & Riefer, D. M. (1999). Theoretical and empirical
review of multinomial process tree modeling. Psychonomic Bulletin &
Review, 6, 57– 86.
Bayen, U. J., Nakamura, G. V., Dupuis, S. E., & Yang, C.–L. (2000). The
use of schematic knowledge about sources in source monitoring. Memory & Cognition, 28, 480 –500.
Bellezza, F. S., & Bower, G. H. (1981). Person stereotypes and memory for
people. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 41, 856 – 865.
Brainerd, C. J., Payne, D. G., Wright, R., & Reyna, V. F. (2003). Phantom
recall. Journal of Memory and Language, 48, 445– 467.
Brainerd, C. J., Wright, R., Reyna, V. F., & Mojardin, A. H. (2001).
Conjoint recognition and phantom recollection. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 27, 307–327.
Chan, J. C. K., & McDermott, K. B. (2006). Remembering pragmatic
inferences. Applied Cognitive Psychology, 20, 633– 639.
Clark, L. F., & Woll, S. B. (1981). Stereotype biases: A reconstructive
analysis of their role in reconstructive memory. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 41, 1064 –1072.
Collins, A., Warnock, E. H., Aiello, N., & Miller, M. L. (1975). Reasoning
from incomplete knowledge. In D. Bobrow & A. Collins (Eds.), Representation and understanding: Studies in cognitive science. New York:
Academic Press.
Cook, G. I., Marsh, R. L., & Hicks, J. L. (2003). Halo and devil effects
demonstrate valence-based influences on source-monitoring decisions.
Consciousness and Cognition, 12, 257–278.
Dewhurst, S. A., & Hitch, G. J. (1999). Cognitive effort and recollective
experience in recognition memory. Memory, 7, 129 –146.
Dodson, C. S., Holland, P. W., & Shimamura, A. P. (1998). On the recollection of specific- and partial-source information. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 24, 1121–1136.
Dodson, C. S., & Johnson, M. K. (1996). Some problems with the process
dissociation approach to memory. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
General, 125, 181–194.
Dodson, C. S., & Schacter, D. L. (2002). When false recognition meets
metacognition: The distinctiveness heuristic. Journal of Memory and
Language, 46, 782– 803.
Dodson, C. S., & Shimamura, A. P. (2000). Differential effects of cue
dependency on item and source memory. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 26, 1023–1044.
Donaldson, W. (1996). The role of decision processes in remembering and
knowing. Memory & Cognition, 24, 523–533.
Dooling, D. J., & Christiaansen, R. E. (1977). Episodic and semantic
aspects of memory for prose. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Human Learning and Memory, 3, 428 – 436.
Frost, P. (2000). The quality of false memory over time: Is memory for
misinformation ‘remembered’ or ‘known’? Psychonomic Bulletin &
Review, 7, 531–536.
Gallo, D. A., & Roediger, H. L., III. (2003). The effects of associations and
aging on illusory recollection. Memory & Cognition, 31, 1036 –1044.
Gallo, D. A., Weiss, J. A., & Schacter, D. L. (2004). Reducing false
recognition with criterial recollection tests: Distinctiveness heuristic
versus criterion shifts. Journal of Memory Language, 51, 473– 493.
Gardiner, J. M., & Java, R. I. (1993). Recognizing and remembering. In
A. F. Collins, S. E. Gathercole, M. A. Conway, & P. E. Morris (Eds.),
Theories of memory (pp. 163–188). Hove, United Kingdom: Erlbaum.
Hannigan, S. L., & Reinitz, M. T. (2001). A demonstration and comparison
of two types of inference-based memory errors. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory and Cognition, 27, 931–940.
Hicks, J. L., & Cockman, D. W. (2003). The effect of general knowledge
on source memory and decision processes. Journal of Memory and
Language, 48, 489 –501.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

STEREOTYPES AND ILLUSORY RECOLLECTIONS
Hicks, J. L., & Marsh, R. L. (1999). Attempts to reduce the incidence of
false recall with source monitoring. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 25, 1195–1209.
Hicks, J. L., Marsh, R. L., & Ritschel, L. (2002). The role of recollection
and partial information in source monitoring. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 28, 503–508.
Higham, P. A., & Vokey, J. R. (2004). Illusory recollection and dualprocess models of recognition memory. The Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 57A, 714 –744.
Hirt, E. R., McDonald, H. E., & Markman, K. D. (1998). Expectancy
effects in reconstructive memory: When the past is just what we expected. In S. J. Lynn & K. M. McConkey (Eds.), Truth in memory (pp.
62– 89). New York: Guilford Press.
Jacoby, L. L. (1991). A process dissociation framework: Separating automatic from intentional uses of memory. Journal of Memory and Language, 30, 513–541.
Johnson, M. K., Hashtroudi, S., & Lindsay, D. S. (1993). Source monitoring. Psychological Bulletin, 114, 3–28.
Johnson, M. K., & Raye, C. L. (1981). Reality monitoring. Psychological
Review, 88, 67– 85.
Johnson, M. K., Raye, C. L., Foley, H. J., & Foley, M. A. (1981). Cognitive
operations and decision bias in reality monitoring. American Journal of
Psychology, 94, 37– 64.
Kunda, Z., & Thagard, P. (1996). Forming impressions from stereotypes,
traits, and behaviors: A parallel constraint satisfaction theory. Psychological Review, 103, 284 –308.
Lampinen, J. M., Copeland, S. M., & Neuschatz, J. S. (2001). Recollection
of things schematic: Room schemas revisited. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 27, 1211–1222.
Lampinen, J. M., Neuschatz, J. S., & Payne, D. G. (1999). Source attributions and false memories: A test of the demand characteristics account.
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 6, 130 –135.
Lindsay, D. S. (1990). Misleading suggestions can impair eyewitnesses’
ability to remember event details. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory and Cognition, 16, 1077–1083.
Lindsay, D. S., & Kelley, C. M. (1996). Creating illusions of familiarity in
a cued recall remember/know paradigm. Journal of Memory and Language, 35, 197–211.
Macrae, C. N., & Bodenhausen, G. V. (2000). Social cognition: Thinking
categorically about others. Annual Review of Psychology, 51, 93–120.
Macrae, C. N., Schloerscheidt, A. M., Bodenhausen, G. V., & Milne, A. B.
(2002). Creating memory illusions: Expectancy-based processing and
the generation of false memories. Memory, 10, 63– 80.
Marsh, R. L., Cook, G. I., & Hicks, J. L. (2006). Gender and orientation
stereotypes bias source-monitoring attributions. Memory, 14, 148 –160.
Mather, M., Johnson, M. K., & De Leonardis, D. M. (1999). Stereotype
reliance in source monitoring: Age differences and neuropsychological
test correlates. Cognitive Neuropsychology, 16, 437– 458.
Meiser, T., & Bröder, A. (2002). Memory for multidimensional source
information. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory,
and Cognition, 28, 116 –137.
Meiser, T., & Sattler, C. (2006). Boundaries of the relation between
conscious recollection and source memory for perceptual details. Consciousness and Cognition, 16, 189 –210.
Mitchell, K. J., & Johnson, M. K. (2000). Source monitoring: Attributing
mental experiences. In E. Tulving & F. I. M. Craik (Eds.), The Oxford
handbook of memory (pp. 179 –195). New York: Oxford University Press.
Murnane, K., & Bayen, U. J. (1996). An evaluation of empirical measures
of source identification. Memory & Cognition, 24, 417– 428.
Payne, B. K., Jacoby, L. L., & Lambert, A. J. (2004). Memory monitoring
and the control of stereotype distortion. Journal of Experimental Social
Psychology, 40, 52– 64.

477

Payne, D. G., Elie, C. J., Blackwell, J. M., & Neuschatz, J. S. (1996).
Memory illusions: Recalling, recognizing and recollecting events that
never occurred. Journal of Memory and Language, 35, 261–285.
Perfect, T. J., Mayes, A. R., Downes, J. J., & Van Eijk, R. (1996). Does
context discriminate recollection from familiarity in recognition memory? Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Experimental Psychology, 49, 797– 813.
Rajaram, S. (1993). Remember and knowing: Two means of access to the
personal past. Memory & Cognition, 21, 89 –102.
Roediger, H. L., III, & McDermott, K. B. (1995). Creating false memories:
Remembering words not presented in lists. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 21, 803– 814.
Roediger, H. L., III, McDermott, K. B., Pisoni, D. B., & Gallo, D. A.
(2004). Illusory recollection of voices. Memory, 12, 586 – 602.
Ross, M., & Conway, M. (1986). Remembering one’s own past: The
construction of personal histories. In R. M. Sorrentino & E. T. Higgins
(Eds.) Handbook of motivation and cognition: Foundations of social
behavior (Vol. 1, pp. 122–144). New York: Guilford Press.
Rotello, C. M., Macmillan, N. A., & Reeder, J. A. (2004). Sum-difference
theory of remembering and knowing: A two-dimensional signaldetection model. Psychological Review, 111, 588 – 616.
Schacter, D. L., Israel, L., & Racine, C. A. (1999). Suppressing false
recognition in younger and older adults: The distinctiveness heuristic.
Journal of Memory and Language, 40, 1–24.
Schacter, D. L., Norman, K. A., & Koutstaal, W. (1998). The cognitive
neurosciences of constructive memory. Annual Review of Psychology,
49, 289 –318.
Schacter, D. L., & Slotnick, S. D. (2004). The cognitive neuroscience of
memory distortion. Neuron, 44, 149 –160.
Sherman, J. W., & Bessenoff, G. R. (1999). Stereotypes as source monitoring cues: On the interaction between episodic and semantic memory.
Psychological Science, 10, 106 –110.
Snyder, M., & Uranowitz, S. W. (1978). Reconstructing the past: Some
cognitive consequences of person perception. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 36, 941–950.
Spaniol, J., & Bayen, U. J. (2002). When is schematic knowledge used in
source monitoring? Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 28, 631– 651.
Spears, R., & Haslam, S. A. (1997). Stereotyping and the burden of cognitive
load. In R. Spears & S. A. Haslam (Eds.), The social psychology of
stereotyping and group life (pp. 171–207). Cambridge, MA: Blackwell.
Sulin, R. A., & Dooling, D. J. (1974). Intrusion of a thematic idea in the
retention of prose. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 103, 255–262.
Tulving, E. (1983). Elements of episodic memory. Oxford, England: Clarendon Press.
Tulving, E. (1985). Memory and consciousness. Canadian Psychologist,
26, 1–12.
Whittlesea, B. W. A. (2004). The perception of integrality: Remembering
through the validation of expectation. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 30, 891–908.
Wixted, J. T., & Stretch, V. (2004). In defense of the signal detection
interpretation of remember/know judgments. Psychonomic Bulletin &
Review, 11, 616 – 641.
Zaragoza, M. S., & Lane, S. M. (1994). Source misattributions and the
suggestibility of eyewitness memory. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 20, 934 –945.

Received August 11, 2006
Revision received August 26, 2007
Accepted August 28, 2007 䡲

