First publ. in: Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 94 (2008), 3, pp. 396-411

The Effects of an Implemental Mind-Set on Attitude Strength
Marlone D. Henderson

Yaël de Liver

University of Chicago

Utrecht University

Peter M. Gollwitzer
New York University and University of Konstanz
The authors investigated whether an implemental mind-set fosters stronger attitudes. Participants who
made a decision about how to act (vs. those who held off) expressed a more extreme attitude toward an
issue unrelated to the decision (Experiment 1). Participants who planned the implementation of a decision
(vs. deliberated vs. control) exhibited less ambivalent (Experiment 2) and more accessible (Experiment
3) attitudes toward various objects unrelated to the decision. Moreover, an attitude reported by planning
participants better predicted self-reported behavior 1 week later (Experiment 4). Finally, results suggest
that the effect of an implemental mind-set on attitude strength toward unrelated objects is driven by a
focus on information that supports an already-made decision (Experiment 5). Implications for attitudes,
goals, and mind-sets are discussed.
Keywords: extremity, ambivalence, accessibility, mind-set, attitude strength

Brandstätter & Frank, 2002; Higgins, Kruglanski, & Pierro, 2003;
Kruglanski et al., 2000). Therefore, attitude as well as action
control (goal) researchers have recognized the importance of identifying factors that strengthen and weaken evaluative reactions.
The current set of studies examined the proposition that a mind-set
related to action control (i.e., the implemental mind-set originating
from planning the implementation of a chosen goal) can affect
attitude strength toward objects that are unrelated to that action.

Although daily life is filled with examples of people expressing
their strong attitudes in social settings (e.g., pro-choice protesters,
religious fundamentalists), it is clear that people also frequently
evaluate attitude objects that elicit weak reactions as well. These
weak reactions include, for example, attitudes that are rife with
contradictory feelings and beliefs, attitudes that are moderate
rather than extreme, and attitudes that are expressed with some
hesitancy or slowness. Strong and weak attitudes can be functional, depending on the current action control problem at hand
(Gollwitzer, 1990; Kuhl, 1985). For example, although high levels
of ambivalence may indicate appropriate caution when deciding
whether to pursue alternative end states, they may also be indicative of counterproductive behavior (second-guessing and indecisiveness) during actual goal striving (Armor & Taylor, 2003;

Attitude Strength
The impact of an attitude on individuals’ responses toward
objects depends on two properties of the attitude construct—
content and strength. Content refers to the overall evaluation
(positive or negative) of some attitude object. Strength refers to the
overall evaluation’s persistence over time, influence on cognitive
processing, resistance to change, and regulation of behavior
(Krosnick & Petty, 1995). Whereas the content of the attitude
determines the direction of the impact, the strength of the attitude
determines the degree to which the attitude steers people’s reactions. Several indicators or aspects of strong attitudes have been
especially well studied (see Petty & Krosnick, 1995, for a review),
including accessibility (e.g., Fazio, Chen, McDonel, & Sherman,
1982), certainty (e.g., Tormala & Petty, 2002), importance (e.g.,
Krosnick, 1988), extremity (e.g., Downing, Judd, & Brauer, 1992),
and ambivalence (e.g., Visser & Mirabile, 2004). Although some
researchers have argued that one or two higher order constructs
can capture these properties of attitude strength (e.g., Bassili,
1996; Pomerantz, Chaiken, & Tordesillas, 1995), others have
called for a more complex framework (e.g., Krosnick, Boninger,
Chuang, Berent, & Carnot, 1993; Raden, 1985; Visser, Bizer, &
Krosnick, 2006; Visser, Krosnick, & Simmons, 2003).
Notably, Pomerantz and her colleagues (Pomerantz et al., 1995;
Tordesillas, Pomerantz, Chaiken, & Zimmerman, 1994, as cited in
Pomerantz et al., 1995, p. 416) investigated how certain aspects of

Marlone D. Henderson, Department of Psychology, University of Chicago; Yaël de Liver, Department of Social and Organizational Psychology,
Utrecht University, Utrecht, the Netherlands; Peter M. Gollwitzer, Department of Psychology, New York University, and Department of Psychology, University of Konstanz, Konstanz, Germany.
This research was supported by a grant from the Interdisciplinary Center
for Research on Intentions and Intentionality at the University of Konstanz
to Peter M. Gollwitzer and grants from the Netherlands Organization for
Scientific Research and Netherlands Organization for Health Research and
Development to Yaël de Liver.
Many thanks to Gliana Ramirez, Anastasia Adler, and Ryan D.
Coganow for their assistance with data collection and to Amie Green,
Masumi Iida, and Joshua Correll for their assistance with data analyses.
Special thanks also go to Kentaro Fujita for extensive discussion of ideas
and to Penny Visser and Zakary L. Tormala for comments on a draft of this
article.
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Marlone
D. Henderson, Department of Psychology, University of Chicago, 5848
South University Avenue, Chicago, IL 60637. E-mail:
mhenderson@uchciago.edu

Konstanzer Online-Publikations-System (KOPS)
URN: http://nbn-resolving.de/urn:nbn:de:bsz:352-opus-63747
URL: http://kops.ub.uni-konstanz.de/volltexte/2009/6374/

396

397
attitude strength produce selective judgments through different
forms of biased cognitive processing. They conceptualized selective judgments as a form of resistance against attitude change and
examined the impact such resistance had on attitude and behavior
relations. Pomerantz and her colleagues found that particular aspects of attitude strength (certainty, extremity, ambivalence, accessibility) that center on how confident individuals are in their
attitudes loaded onto what they called a Commitment factor. They
found that increases in such properties were associated with a
“closed-minded orientation” (Pomerantz et al., 2005, p. 415) toward attitude-incongruent information. These findings suggest that
if individuals can be guided to spontaneously adopt an evaluatively
closed-minded orientation, they should exhibit increased strength
in their attitudes.

Action Phases and Mind-Sets
Over the last 20 years, research has shown that thinking about an
object (e.g., vacation) in the context of a plan (e.g., How will I plan
my vacation?) versus a deliberative choice (e.g., Should I go on a
vacation or not?) can influence how people handle available information (for reviews, see Gollwitzer, 1990; Gollwitzer & Bayer,
1999; Gollwitzer, Fujita, & Oettingen, 2004). These findings have
been interpreted in terms of mind-set theory (Gollwitzer, 1990),
which postulates that the unique tasks associated with the different
action phases of goal pursuit lead to the activation of appropriate
cognitive procedures or mind-sets. For instance, when individuals
are in a postdecisional or planning phase of goal pursuit, they face
the task of promoting the initiation of action that is instrumental to
attaining the chosen goal. Solving this task requires individuals to
remain committed to their goal decision, because implemental
concerns will fail if individuals begin to doubt themselves (Armor
& Taylor, 2003). Therefore, individuals in a planning mode often
engage in a selective, one-sided analysis of information that supports their dominant (favorable) evaluation of goal-relevant issues
(Gagné & Lydon, 2001a; Harmon-Jones & Harmon-Jones, 2002;
Puca, 2001; Taylor & Gollwitzer, 1995). Or when individuals are
in a predecisional or deliberative phase of goal pursuit, they have
the task of making the best possible choice of which end-state to
pursue in the first place. Because it is unclear when choosing
between alternative end-states which pieces of information might
be relevant to assessing the desirability and feasibility of a particular end-state, individuals are likely to remain even-handed and
unbiased when processing incoming or stored information. This
open-minded orientation occurs regardless of whether it supports
or contradicts the individual’s dominant attitude toward potential
goal-relevant issues (Puca, 2001; Taylor & Gollwitzer, 1995; also
see Gerard, 1967).
The task that a person engages in activates cognitive procedures
that are relevant to solving the specific task at hand (i.e., planning
or deliberating), which can then extend to other unrelated objects
(see Gollwitzer et al., 2004, for a review). The sum total of the
activated cognitive procedures is dubbed mind-set (Bargh &
Chartrand, 2000; Heckhausen & Gollwitzer, 1987; also see Smith
& Branscombe, 1987). Studies from as early as the 1900s described how encountering tasks that require the use of a particular
procedure, such as attending to the frequency of a particular
stimulus, increases the likelihood that the procedure will be used
on subsequently encountered tasks (Ach, 1910; Külpe, 1904; Rees

& Israel, 1935). More recent work has continued to show that
mind-sets can be used as a framework for explaining cognitive
carryover effects in various social psychological domains outside
of goal pursuit (e.g., Chen, Shechter, & Chaiken, 1996; Galinsky
& Moskowitz, 2000; Hugenberg, Bodenhausen, & McLain, 2006;
Kray, Galinsky, & Wong, 2006; Sassenberg & Moskowitz, 2005;
Sassenberg, Moskowitz, Jacoby, & Hansen, 2007).
As an illustration of the mind-set work that has been done in the
domain of goal pursuit, we cite a study that found when testing
participants’ memory concerning an unrelated task that participants who were asked to plan the implementation of a decision
recognized incidental information that was peripherally displayed
less often than participants who were in a predecisional, deliberative state (Gollwitzer, Bayer, & Wasel, 1998, as cited in Gollwitzer & Bayer, 1999, p. 408; see also Fujita, Gollwitzer, &
Oettingen, 2007). Such differences in selective attention are
thought to be especially indicative of an implemental mind-set
because goal implementation is likely to be more successful as
people narrow their focus to avoid potentially distracting stimuli.
Of importance, the motivational consequences that result from this
one-sided focus have also been shown to transfer to newly encountered stimuli. For example, Taylor and Gollwitzer (1995)
showed that implemental mind-set participants who planned how
to achieve an already decided end-state viewed themselves as less
vulnerable to experiencing an unrelated risky event than
deliberative-mind-set participants who considered whether to pursue an end-state in the first place. Although such findings do not
speak directly to the impact of an implemental mind-set on attitude
strength, they are consistent with the notion that overall confidence
differs between action phases of goal pursuit.

Implemental Mind-Set and Attitude Strength
In the present studies, we aimed to bring the concept of mind-set
to bear on attitudes. One finding that is clear from research both
inside and outside the tradition of mind-set theory (Gollwitzer,
1990) is that individuals who commit to a certain course of action
tend to engage in an unambiguous, evaluatively polarized or onesided assessment of information in support of their dominant
attitude (Brandstätter & Frank, 2002; Brehm, 1956; Frey, 1986;
Wicklund & Brehm, 1976), regardless of whether that attitude is
positive or negative (Bayer & Gollwitzer, 2005). This one-sided
assessment fosters the transition of the made decision into actual
action and goal attainment. In terms of attitude theory, one could
say that the attitude toward the goal becomes stronger. Indeed, a
pilot study confirmed that participants who were asked to think
about the steps that were needed to implement a made decision
rather than the pros and cons for making a decision a particular
way later reported stronger (less ambivalent) attitudes about the
topic of that decision (de Liver, Henderson, & Gollwitzer, 2003).
Given the carryover properties of mind-sets, we hypothesized that
as people moved into the implemental, planning phase of goal
pursuit, they would also experience an increase in attitude strength
toward objects that are unrelated to their current goal pursuit. The
current set of experiments tested this hypothesis with respect to a
variety of attitude objects.
In Experiment 1, we tested whether implemental mind-set participants were more likely than deliberative mind-set participants
to adopt an extreme position toward an issue that is irrelevant to

398
their goal concern. In Experiment 2, we tested whether implemental mind-set participants evidenced lower levels of ambivalence
than did deliberative and neutral mind-set participants toward a
variety of unrelated objects. In Experiment 3, we tested whether
implemental mind-set participants evidenced more accessible evaluations of unrelated objects than did deliberative and neutral
mind-set participants. In Experiment 4, we tested whether implemental mind-set participants evidenced a greater correspondence
between their attitude and behavior for an unrelated issue than did
neutral mind-set participants. In Experiment 5, we investigated the
process that is hypothesized to underlie the effects of an implemental mind-set on attitude strength. Specifically, we tested
whether implemental mind-set participants directed to focus on the
pros behind their decision evidenced a stronger attitude toward an
unrelated issue than did implemental mind-set participants directed
to focus on both the pros and cons behind their decision.

Experiment 1: Does an Implemental Mind-Set Increase
Attitude Extremity?
In an implementation phase of goal pursuit, the task is to plan
action and avoid the consideration of information that might interfere with carrying out a decision. An evaluatively two-sided
perspective has the potential to obstruct the task of implementation
because it gives conflicting behavioral cues. One way to avoid
such conflict is to selectively process information about objects in
a positive or negative direction (Nordgren, van Harreveld, &
Van der Pligt, 2006). As an implemental mind-set is posited to
transfer a general increase in attitude strength via selective information processing, this study assessed attitudinal extremity with an
open-ended measure. Thought-listing is a key tool for assessing the
degree of information processing (Cacioppo, von Hippel, & Ernst,
1997; Heckhausen & Gollwitzer, 1987). In the current experiment,
we tested whether an implemental versus deliberative mind-set
leads to a more extreme (evaluatively one-sided) position toward a
controversial issue.

Method
Participants
Participants were 36 students (23 women, 13 men) enrolled in
one of several psychology courses, who participated in partial
fulfillment of a course requirement. The mean age for participants
in this experiment and all remaining experiments was 19 years old.
No gender or age differences emerged for any of the analyses
reported. The sample for this experiment and all remaining experiments was restricted to participants who had never participated in
any mind-set experiments.

Procedure and Materials
Participants were randomly assigned to a deliberative or implemental mind-set group, with 18 participants in each condition. We
invited participants to a lab experiment dealing with the assessment of students’ perspective toward different objects. Participants
were ushered into separate experimental cubicles, with each cubicle equipped with a computer. Participants were informed that they
would be engaging in two separate tasks during the course of the
experiment. As a cover story, participants in all conditions were

told that as a measure of relationship sensitivity, they would have
the opportunity to write as though they were giving advice to
others about how they should handle relationship problems. For
this task, they would have a choice between two topics to write
about (i.e., sexual inexperience and honesty issues in romantic
relationships). The crucial difference was that depending on condition, participants were either asked to make this choice before
(implemental mind-set) or after (deliberative mind-set) engaging
in the second task.
In the second task, which constituted the measure of interest,
participants first read information about a controversial issue.
After that, they wrote down their thoughts about this issue, and we
calculated whether participants’ thoughts about this unrelated issue
were evaluatively one- versus two-sided. Note that while responding to the second task (attitude measure), participants in the deliberative mind-set condition expected to go back to the first task
(romantic relationship advice) and receive more information in
order to make their decision. Participants in the implemental
mind-set condition, on the other hand, expected to go back to the
first task and begin working on it (writing advice). In essence,
participants in the deliberative mind-set condition were interrupted
in the midst of making their decision, whereas participants in the
implemental mind-set condition were interrupted in the midst of
preparing to carry out their decision.
Mind-set manipulation. We created a deliberative and implemental mind-set with the choice paradigm used in previous mindset research (e.g., Armor & Taylor, 2003; Fujita et al., 2007;
Heckhausen & Gollwitzer, 1987; Puca & Schmalt, 2001). Participants were asked to pick for themselves the relationship area
(sexual inexperience or honesty) on which they felt more capable
of giving advice. Participants in the deliberative mind-set condition were told that the best way to find out which type of relationship area that they were better equipped to give advice on was to
read letters that represented both areas. Participants were then led
to believe that they would read one sample letter from each of the
two problem areas in order to help them decide which area would
allow them to give their best advice. Participants were then told
that after they read both sample letters, they would choose the area
on which they wanted to give advice. It was stressed to participants
that they should hold off making their decision until they read both
sample letters. Participants were then asked to indicate to the
experimenter which sample letter (sexual inexperience or honesty)
that they wanted to read first.
Participants in the implemental mind-set condition were asked
to choose the relationship area on which they wanted to give
advice. Participants were told that if they considered themselves to
be a person who gave better advice on issues related to either
sexual inexperience or honesty in relationships, then they should
choose that particular area on which to give advice. In contrast to
deliberative mind-set participants, implemental mind-set participants were not told that they would receive any sample letters in
order to aid in their decision making. Rather, implemental mindset participants were told that they would receive a sample letter
after they had made their decision in order to help them prepare for
giving advice to others.
We controlled for exposure to different information between our
experimental conditions by having all participants read only one
letter. Deliberative mind-set participants who chose to receive the
sexual inexperience (honesty) letter first and implemental mind-set

399
participants who chose to give advice on the sexual inexperience
(honesty) area received a letter titled “Sample Sexual Experience
Issue Letter” (“Sample Honesty Issue Letter”). The content of the
letter was the same, regardless of participants’ choice (see Appendix A). The letter contained elements of dishonesty and sexual
inexperience, so it was believable that it represented the type of
honesty or sexual inexperience issues for which people might ask
for advice.1
Dependent measure. After reading the sample letter, participants were interrupted to do the second task, which was completing an attitude measure on an unrelated topic. All instructions for
this task were given on the computer. As an introduction to this
attitude questionnaire, participants were asked to provide their
opinion on a topic that was supposedly being debated within the
United States—whether the government should be allowed to read
foreigners’ e-mail.2 Specifically, participants read the following:
We are interested in getting your position on an issue that is being
hotly debated within United States right now. How much access
should the government (e.g., CIA, FBI) have to foreigners’ e-mail?
On the one hand, Americans believe that foreigners should be able to
communicate without worrying about whether other people are spying
on them and learning things about them that might be used to damage
their reputation, career, or relationships. On the other hand, Americans want this kind of oversight because it helps protect the country
from individuals and organizations that only want to hurt the country
economically, physically, and emotionally.

In order to reduce the likelihood that participants already held a
strong attitude toward this issue, we restricted our sample to
participants who were not foreigners. Participants were also told
that their responses would be completely anonymous.
Participants were asked to provide an open-ended response
regarding their thoughts on the issue. We had two independent
raters (both blind to condition) code how polarized each participant’s position was toward the issue using the following system:
Individuals who stated they were completely against the government allowing the reading of foreigners’ e-mail received a code of
–1. Individuals who stated they were against the government
allowing the reading or foreigners’ e-mail but also mentioned
exceptions in which they would be in favor of it or mentioned the
possibility of it being done in a way that they would favor received
a code of 0. Individuals who stated they were in favor of the
government allowing the reading of foreigners’ e-mail but also
mentioned exceptions in which they would not be in favor of it or
mentioned the possibility of it being done in a way that they would
not favor also received a code of 0. Finally, individuals who stated
they were completely in favor of the government allowing the
reading of foreigners’ e-mail received a code of 1 (see Appendix
B for examples of each coded response).
Agreement among raters was high (r ⫽ .89). Disagreements
were resolved through discussion. Using the coding system, we
created an index of whether participants expressed an evaluatively
one-sided or two-sided attitude toward the issue. Specifically, we
examined the number of participants in each condition who received a code of ⫺1 or 1 and compared it with the number of
participants who received a code of 0. This served as our main
dependent variable. After responding to the open-ended question,
participants answered demographic questions. Before proceeding
back to the relationship task, participants were asked to recall the

sample letter. After this memory check, participants were thoroughly debriefed and thanked.

Results
Attitude Extremity
We analyzed the proportion of participants who adopted an
evaluatively one-sided position toward the focal issue using logistic regression, with the deliberative mind-set condition coded as 0
and the implemental mind-set condition coded as 1. As expected,
we found a significant effect of condition (B ⫽ 1.41, odds ratio ⫽
4.09, Wald ⫽ 3.88, p ⬍ .05). When we examined the type of
attitude expressed by the 18 participants in the deliberative mindset condition, the following pattern emerged: 4 (22.2%) expressed
a completely negative attitude, 11 (61.1%) expressed a moderate
attitude, and 3 (16.7%) expressed a completely positive attitude.
When we examined the type of attitude expressed by the 18
participants in the implemental mind-set condition, the following
pattern emerged: 10 (55.6%) expressed a completely negative
attitude, 5 (27.8%) expressed a moderate attitude, and 3 (16.7%)
expressed a completely positive attitude. Overall, 72.2% of participants in the implemental mind-set condition expressed an
evaluatively one-sided position toward the focal issue, whereas
only 38.9% of participants in the deliberative mind-set did so.

Equivalency of the Groups
In order to check whether our experimental groups engaged in
different amounts of effortful processing prior to the attitude
assessment, we analyzed participants’ memory of the sample letter. We created two memory indices, with the second being more
stringent than the first. The first index was based on the extent to
which participants recalled the gist or overall purpose of the letter.
Specifically, we analyzed whether participants recalled that the
author of the letter was involved in an online relationship and was
unsure about how to develop the relationship, given that the other
person was more attractive. All participants recalled the gist of the
letter. The second index was based on the extent to which participants recalled the exact details of the letter. Overall, there were 25
pieces of information conveyed in the letter (see Appendix A). For
example, the first sentence in the letter contained the following
four pieces of information: (a) “I met this person on the Internet”
(b) “three months ago” (c) “and we talk everyday,” and (d)
“through instant messenger.” Results revealed no difference between the deliberative (M ⫽ 8.06, SD ⫽ 2.98) and implemental
(M ⫽ 8.50, SD ⫽ 4.63) mind-set groups in the amount of infor1

Results revealed that the implemental and deliberative mind-set groups
did not significantly differ in the extent to which they believed they were
reading about a particular content area in their sample letter. Specifically,
50% of participants in the implemental mind-set group choose the honesty
area to give advice on and expected to receive a sample letter from that
supposed area, and 67% of participants in the deliberative mind-set group
choose to receive their first sample letter from the honesty area, X2
(1,36) ⫽ 1.03, p ⫽ .31.
2
Note that at the time that this experiment was conducted, it was not
publicly known that the United States’ National Security Agency was
monitoring domestic and international communications.

400
mation recalled (t ⬍ 1). We also examined whether participants in
the experimental groups engaged in different amounts of effortful
processing during the attitude assessment by analyzing the number
of words that were used in their open-ended responses. Results
revealed that the deliberative (M ⫽ 54.11, SD ⫽ 33.21) and
implemental (M ⫽ 54.56, SD ⫽ 36.19) mind-set groups did not
differ in the length of their evaluative responses (t ⬍ 1). Indeed,
the extremity of position results remained the same after controlling for the length of participants evaluative responses. Therefore,
these results can not be explained in terms of differences in
verbosity between our experimental groups.3

Discussion
Implemental mind-set participants were almost twice as likely
as deliberative mind-set participants to adopt an evaluatively onesided position toward an issue that was completely unrelated to the
goal decision at hand. The extent to which individuals adopt a
one-sided or unqualified position toward an issue is assumed to be
one of the most obvious indicators of attitude extremity (Abelson,
1995). Because both groups were exposed to the same information
and no differences were found in the recall of stimulus information
or length of evaluative responses, it seems unlikely that the observed differences in extremity can be explained by differences in
information exposure or effortful processing between the groups.
Rather, it seems that it was the differences between the phases of
goal pursuit that participants were engaged in that led them to
adopt an evaluatively one-sided (closed-minded) reaction toward
an unrelated controversial issue.
In the next experiment, we extended our examination of the
effects of mind-sets on attitude strength in several ways. First, we
examined a different property of attitude strength, namely attitudinal ambivalence. Second, we activated a deliberative and implemental mind-set using a different paradigm. Third, we included a
control group in the design because one potential criticism of
Experiment 1 is that our observed differences in attitude strength
were due to the fact that we explicitly told our deliberative mindset group to hold off on making a judgment. By including a control
group in the remaining studies, we can clarify the interpretation of
our results. Finally, we tested the generality of the effects of
mind-sets by assessing ambivalence toward a variety of objects,
thus testing the assumption even more critically that an implemental mind-set increases the strength of attitudes toward irrelevant
objects and issues.

Experiment 2: Does an Implemental Mind-Set Decrease
Attitude Ambivalence?
In this experiment, participants were asked to report their subjective experience of ambivalence toward numerous objects. Prior
to giving their evaluations, participants were induced into a deliberative, implemental, or a neutral mind-set. By adding the neutral
mind-set control group, we can test whether any change in ambivalence that is observed is due to the implemental mind-set, deliberative mind-set, or both. Admittedly, it is difficult to make exact
predictions about the outcome of each mind-set on ambivalence
relative to a “neutral mind-set,” mainly because it is unclear
whether such a neutral mind-set can be successfully created (see
Armor & Taylor, 2003, p. 89; Taylor & Gollwitzer, 1995, p. 217,

for similar discussions; also see Campbell & Stanley, 1963, p. 13).
That is, even if a control group of individuals in a neutral mind-set
were not given any instruction to adopt a deliberative or implemental mind-set, they might still spontaneously adopt a particular
mind-set during the course of an experiment. Indeed, one possibility is that individuals in a neutral mind-set control group might
be so focused on planning their next task in the experiment that
they might exhibit no differences in ambivalence relative to individuals in an implemental mind-set but still exhibit reduced levels
of ambivalence compared with individuals in a deliberative mindset. Another possibility is that because individuals in neither a
neutral nor a deliberative mind-set group are required to come to
a decision on a particular end-state, both groups might exhibit
similar levels of ambivalence while still exhibiting elevated levels
compared with individuals in an implemental mind-set.

Method
Participants
Participants were 123 students (99 women, 24 men) enrolled in
an introductory psychology course, who participated in partial
fulfillment of a course requirement. We invited participants to take
part in an e-mail study that involved getting students’ perspective
on several objects. All participants who signed up then received an
e-mail with a computer program as an attachment that included the
study materials. Participants were told that they would be taking
part in separate tasks that dealt with getting their perspective on
things, with one task focused on how students think about personal
problems and projects and the other task focused on the attitudes
that students have toward things. Participants were randomly assigned to one of three conditions: deliberative, implemental, or
neutral mind-set control group. There were 41 participants in each
condition.

Procedure and Materials
Participants assigned to the mind-set conditions were first induced into either a deliberative or an implemental mind-set for the
first task and then had their ambivalence assessed toward a variety
of objects for the second task. Participants assigned to the neutral
mind-set condition responded to our dependent measure of ambivalence without being induced into a particular mind-set beforehand
(see Gagné & Lydon, 2001a, 2001b; Gollwitzer & Kinney, 1989).
Participants in our neutral mind-set condition were induced into a
mind-set after reporting their attitude in order to be able to use the
same cover story (i.e., “take part in two tasks”) for all participants.
Mind-set manipulation. In this experiment, we created a deliberative and implemental mind-set by employing the personal
problem versus project paradigm used in previous mind-set re3

Political ideology was measured during a separate mass questionnaire
session by means of the following item: “We hear a lot of talk these days
about liberals and conservatives. Where on the following scale of political
orientation would you place yourself?” The answer scale ranged from ⫺5
(extremely liberal) to 5 (extremely conservative). We found no difference
between groups (t ⬍ 1), with the average political orientation of the
deliberative (M⫽ ⫺2.39) and implemental (M⫽ ⫺1.69) mind-set groups
falling on the liberal side. We thank John T. Jost for providing this data set.

401
search (e.g., Gollwitzer, Heckhausen, & Steller, 1990; Gollwitzer
& Kinney, 1989; Taylor & Gollwitzer, 1995). Specifically, we
activated a deliberative mind-set by asking participants to nominate a personal problem in their life and weigh the pros and cons
of making or not making a personal change decision regarding that
problem (e.g., “Should I move out of the dormitory?”). Participants listed both the potential positive and negative, short-term and
long-term consequences of deciding one way or another on the
problem they nominated. In contrast, we activated an implemental
mind-set by asking participants to nominate a personal project in
their life and plan the implementation of that project. Participants
named a project that they intended to accomplish within the
following 3 months (e.g., to move out of the dormitory) and then
listed the five most crucial steps that they deemed necessary to
implementing that project. After which, they indicated when,
where, and how they wanted to perform those steps.
Dependent measure. We generated a list of 30 objects for this
experiment (see Appendix C). Participants were simply asked to
report how ambivalent they were toward each object. Specifically,
we measured participants’ ambivalence by asking “How conflicted/ambivalent are your feelings and/or beliefs towards. . . .” Answers were given on a 6-point scale that ranged from 1 (not at all
ambivalent) to 6 (extremely ambivalent). The order of each object
was randomly determined for each participant. Given that we were
specifically interested in assessing participants’ general experience
of ambivalence across different objects, we created a measure of
ambivalence by averaging participants’ responses to the 30 items
(␣ ⫽ .85; see de Liver, Van der Pligt, & Wigboldus, 2007).
After participants completed the computer program, an electronic file of their responses was e-mailed to the experimenter.
They were then thanked and fully debriefed.

Results
Content of Manipulation
Adopting the coding system used in previous research (e.g.,
Gollwitzer, Heckhausen, & Steller, 1990), we found that 50.0% of
participants’ problems and projects dealt with career-related issues
(e.g., becoming a lawyer, deciding whether to work during a year
off from school), 22.0% dealt with lifestyle-related related issues
(e.g., becoming more healthy, deciding whether to get help with
mood problems), and 28.0% dealt with interpersonal issues (e.g.,
breaking up with boyfriend, deciding whether to move in with
sibling).

1 participant’s project in the implemental mind-set group dealt
with “how to get into medical school,” which led us to delete that
participant’s ratings for “nurses.” Finally, for each participant we
calculated the mean ambivalence score across the objects.
Participants’ ambivalence score was entered into a one-way
analysis of variance (ANOVA), with mind-set condition (implemental, deliberative, and neutral) as a between-participant variable. The condition effect was significant, F(2, 120) ⫽ 3.35, p ⬍
.05. Specific comparisons revealed that the implemental mind-set
group evidenced a significantly lower amount of ambivalence (M
⫽ 2.46, SD ⫽ 0.55) compared with the deliberative (M ⫽ 2.74,
SD ⫽ 0.67), t(80) ⫽ 2.02, p ⬍ .05, d ⫽ 0.45, and neutral (M ⫽
2.80, SD ⫽ 0.66), t(80) ⫽ 2.52, p ⬍ .05, d ⫽ 0.56, mind-set
groups. No significant difference was observed between the deliberative and neutral mind-set groups (t ⬍ 1).

Discussion
Consistent with our conceptual framework, results showed that
compared with the neutral and deliberative mind-set groups, the
implemental mind-set group expressed the lowest amount of ambivalence toward a variety of objects. The objects that we asked
participants to evaluate were taken from all domains of life (i.e.,
health, leisure, business, and food), and consistent results were
obtained even after we restricted our analyses to objects that were
not related to participants’ listed problems and projects. Accordingly, the observed implemental mind-set effect cannot be explained as a consequence of semantic priming (see Bargh &
Chartrand, 2000, for a similar discussion) but rather should to be
interpreted in terms of procedural (or mind-set) priming.
Regarding the direction of our observed effect, we failed to find
any difference between our deliberative and neutral mind-set conditions on attitudinal ambivalence, suggesting that our results are
not due to any demand conveyed in the instructions for activating
a deliberative mind-set. It is important to reiterate that the deliberative mind-set is centered on the predecisional phase of goal
pursuit where people have to solve the task of choosing between
wishes (i.e., potential goals). As becoming involved with this task
activates a cognitive procedure that leads to open-mindedness
(Fujita et al., 2007), our lack of difference between the neutral and
deliberative mind-set conditions might suggest that participants in
a relatively benign experimental context naturally gravitate or
default toward an open-minded state until they set upon the task of
concerning themselves with how to carry out an already set goal,
a possibility that we consider later (see the General Discussion
section).

Attitude Ambivalence
In order to ensure that our results were not due to any semantic
relationship between the objects and participants’ goal decisions,
we took the following steps before analyzing ambivalence ratings.
We identified all objects that were semantically related to the topic
that participants had chosen in the manipulation phase (.04%
versus .03% for deliberative and implemental mind-set conditions,
respectively). We then deleted participants’ rating for these specific objects before creating an index of ambivalence. For example, 1 participant’s problem in the deliberative mind-set group
dealt with “whether to continue as a pre-health major,” which led
us to delete that participant’s rating for “nurses.” In another case,

Experiment 3: Does an Implemental Mind-Set Increase
Attitude Accessibility?
In this experiment, we tested whether individuals induced into
an implemental mind-set evidence more accessible attitudes (faster
evaluative response latencies) than individuals not induced into an
implemental mind-set. Attitude accessibility, usually measured by
response latencies to overall evaluations, is an important operative
index of attitude strength, as it refers to the strength of the link
between the attitude object and an overall evaluation. Interestingly,
previous research has shown that individuals slow down when
evaluating objects that elicit higher amounts of ambivalence (e.g.,

402
Bargh, Chaiken, Govender, & Pratto, 1992; Brömer, 1998;
Huckfeldt & Sprague, 2000). Consequently, we decided to also
test whether individuals induced into an implemental mind-set
would show the greatest advantage in terms of their speed-up
effect for objects that have the potential to elicit high amounts of
ambivalence. In other words, we examined whether the type of
self-regulatory mind-set that is activated interacts with the type of
object that is evaluated (high ambivalence vs. low ambivalence) in
determining how fast participants report their evaluations.

Method

object that was determined from a normative study. These scores
were based on separate unipolar assessments of positive and negative reactions toward each object, which were combined using a
mathematical formula (see Kaplan, 1972); scores could range from
0 (low) to 6 (high). On the basis of this normative data, we
categorized those objects that received an ambivalence score below the median ambivalence as “low ambivalence objects” (M ⫽
0.61) and those objects that received an ambivalence score above
the median ambivalence as “high ambivalence objects” (M ⫽
1.63). Making this distinction, we were able to calculate the mean
response latency for objects that had the potential to elicit relatively low or high amounts of ambivalence.

Participants
Participants were 96 students (78 women, 18 men) enrolled in
one of several psychology courses who participated in partial
fulfillment of a course requirement. The design of the current study
was a 3 (mind-set condition: deliberative vs. implemental vs.
neutral) ⫻ 2 (potential attitudinal ambivalence elicited by object:
low vs. high) ⫻ 2 (evaluation: good vs. bad), with the first variable
as a between-participant variable and the last two variables as
within-participant variables. There were 32 participants in each
condition.

Procedure
We invited participants to a lab experiment dealing with the
assessment of students’ perspective toward several objects. Participants were ushered into separate experimental cubicles, each of
which was equipped with a computer. All participants were informed that they would be engaging in two separate tasks during
the course of the experiment. For the first part participants were
induced into their respective mind-set, and for the second part they
reported their summary evaluation of a variety of objects. As in
Experiment 2, all materials were presented on a computer.
Mind-set manipulation. Disguised as a personality assessment
tool (see Harmon-Jones & Harmon-Jones, 2002), the same procedure as in Experiment 2 was used to activate a deliberative and
implemental mind-set. For the neutral mind-set control condition,
participants were asked to think about an ordinary day in their life
and asked to describe at least seven things that they normally do
during a typical day (see Harmon-Jones & Harmon-Jones, 2002).
Dependent measure. To measure attitude accessibility, we
used the procedure outlined by Fazio, Sanbonmatsu, Powell, and
Kardes (1986). In this task, participants were asked to report their
evaluation of a variety of attitudinal stimuli that were taken from
the Fazio et al. (1986) studies.4 Participants were presented a series
of 90 words on the computer screen and told that their task was to
indicate their evaluation of the object represented by each word by
pressing either the good (J) key or the bad (F) key. The objects
were randomly presented to each participant. Participants were
told to respond as quickly as possible. Our dependent measure was
how long participants took to report their evaluation.
Given that participants were expected to slow down when
evaluating high-ambivalence rather than low-ambivalence objects
(e.g., Bargh et al., 1992), we assessed whether an implemental
mind-set would especially facilitate responses to those objects that
had the potential to elicit relatively high amounts of ambivalence.
Bargh et al. (1992) reported mean ambivalence scores for each

Results
Content of Manipulation
We found that 14.6% of participants’ activities, problems, and
projects dealt with career-related issues (e.g., studying for a class,
publishing a novel, deciding whether to transfer to a different
school), 60.2% dealt with lifestyle-related related issues (e.g.,
playing video games, preparing a presentation to a group, deciding
whether to quit a sports team), and 25.1% dealt with interpersonal
issues (e.g., instant messaging with a friend, planning a wedding,
deciding whether to move in with a good friend).

Equivalence of Groups
In order to check whether our experimental groups differed in
their valence of evaluations, for each participant we coded their
good evaluations as 1 and their bad evaluations as 0 and created
two evaluation indices by averaging across the low- and highambivalence objects. Participants’ mean attitude toward low- and
high-ambivalence objects was analyzed using a 3 (mind-set condition: implemental, deliberative, neutral) ⫻ 2 (potential ambivalence elicited by object: low vs. high) repeated-measures ANOVA,
with the first variable as a between-participant variable and the last
variable as a within-participant variable. Replicating the positive
correlation for ambivalence and valence reported by Bargh et al.
(1992, p. 898), our results revealed a significant main effect of
ambivalence, F(1, 93) ⫽ 1,159.77, p ⬍ .001, with highambivalence objects evaluated more positively (M ⫽ .64, SD ⫽
.08) than low-ambivalence objects (M ⫽ .39, SD ⫽ .05). Although
the main effect of mind-set condition was not significant, F(2,
93) ⫽ 1.86, p ⫽ .16, the Ambivalence ⫻ Condition interaction was
significant, F(2, 93) ⫽ 4.04, p ⬍ .05.
Although the simple effects of mind-set condition for the lowambivalence objects were not significant (F ⬍ 1), the simple
effects of condition for the high-ambivalence objects were significant, F(2, 93) ⫽ 3.42, p ⬍ .05. Specific comparisons showed that
the implemental mind-set group evaluated high-ambivalence objects less positively than the neutral (M ⫽ .61, SD ⫽ .08 vs. M ⫽
.65, SD ⫽ .09), t(62) ⫽ 2.13, p ⬍ .05, d ⫽ 0.54, and deliberative
4
Note that the Fazio, Sanbonmatsu, Powell, and Kardes (1986) and
Bargh et al. (1992) studies had 92 attitude objects. In the current experiment, we presented participants with 90 of them. We omitted Reagan and
Russia because the normative data was collected during 1980s, and we felt
the historical meaning of these objects has considerably changed.

403
(M ⫽ .65, SD ⫽ .07, t(62) ⫽ 2.41, p ⬍ .05, d ⫽ 0.61, mind-set
groups. No difference was observed (t ⬍ 1) between the deliberative and neutral mind-set groups.

Attitude Accessibility
In order to ensure that our results were not due to any semantic
relationship between the objects and participants’ goal decisions,
we took the following steps before analyzing response times. For
every participant in the deliberative mind-set group we identified
all objects (.01%) that were semantically related to their problem,
and for every participant in the implemental mind-set group we
identified all objects (.05%) that were semantically related to their
project. We then deleted response times for these objects before
creating an overall index of response time. As recommended by
Bargh and Chartrand (2000), several additional steps were taken
before analyzing the response time data. To reduce the influence of
outlier response latencies on the analyses, a response was excluded
from the analyses if it was less than 300 ms (.005%) or greater than
2.5 standard deviations (.06%) from the mean response latency.
Statistical analyses were performed on log-transformed data, but
nontransformed response times are reported here. Finally, for each
participant we calculated the mean response time for good and bad
responses for low- and high-ambivalence objects.
We conducted a 3 (mind-set condition: deliberative vs. implemental vs. neutral) ⫻ 2 (potential ambivalence elicited by object:
low vs. high) ⫻ 2 (evaluation: good vs. bad) repeated-measures
ANOVA on these response times. Replicating the results from
Bargh et al. (1992, p. 897), analyses revealed a significant main
effect of ambivalence, F(1, 93) ⫽ 49.86, p ⬍ .001, with participants taking longer to respond to objects that had the potential to
elicit high (M ⫽ 862 ms, SD ⫽ 204) rather than low (M ⫽ 827 ms,
SD ⫽ 186) ambivalence. In addition, a significant main effect of
condition, F(2,93) ⫽ 3.54, p ⬍ .05, emerged. Specific comparisons showed, as expected, that the implemental mind-set group
evidenced significantly faster response times (M ⫽ 786 ms, SD ⫽
205) compared with the neutral (M ⫽ 869 ms, SD ⫽ 176), t(62) ⫽
2.07, p ⬍ .05, d ⫽0.53, and deliberative (M ⫽ 877 ms, SD ⫽ 182),
t(62) ⫽ 2.25, p ⬍ .05, d ⫽ 0.57, mind-set groups. No significant
difference was observed (t ⬍ 1) between the deliberative and
neutral mind-set groups.
Also, as expected, the main effects of object ambivalence and
condition were qualified by an Ambivalence ⫻ Condition interaction effect, F(2, 93) ⫽ 2.94, p ⫽.06. Analysis of the simple effects
of condition for the low-ambivalence objects revealed a marginal
effect of mind-set condition, F(2, 93) ⫽ 2.70, p ⫽ .07. Specific
comparisons revealed a marginal difference between the implemental and neutral mind-set groups (M ⫽ 777 ms, SD ⫽ 203 vs.
M ⫽ 844 ms, SD ⫽ 177), t(62) ⫽ 1.71, p ⫽ .09, d ⫽ 0.43, and a
significant difference between the implemental and deliberative
mind-set groups (M ⫽ 859 ms, SD ⫽ 171), t(62) ⫽ 2.11, p ⬍ .05,
d ⫽ 0.54. No significant difference was observed (t ⬍ 1) between
the deliberative and neutral mind-set groups. As expected, analysis
of the simple effects of condition for the high-ambivalence objects
revealed a significant effect of condition, F(2, 93) ⫽ 3.72, p ⬍ .05.
Specific comparisons showed that the implemental mind-set group
was faster than the neutral (M ⫽ 796 ms, SD ⫽ 214 vs. M ⫽ 895,
SD ⫽ 189), t(62) ⫽ 2.26, p ⬍ .05, d ⫽ 0.57, and deliberative (M
⫽ 896 ms, SD⫽200), t(62) ⫽ 2.29, p ⬍ .05, d ⫽ 0.58, mind-set

groups. Again, no difference was observed (t ⬍ 1) between the
deliberative and neutral mind-set groups. It is important to note
that neither the Condition ⫻ Evaluation interaction effect, F(2,
93) ⫽ 2.19, p ⫽ .12, nor the Condition ⫻ Evaluation ⫻ Ambivalence effect (F ⬍ 1) was significant.
In addition to the above analyses, we conducted paired-samples
t tests for response times for high- and low-ambivalence objects
for our three experimental conditions. Results revealed that both
the deliberative (M ⫽ 896 ms vs. M ⫽ 859 ms), t(31) ⫽ 2.75, p ⫽
.01, d ⫽ 0.99, and neutral (M ⫽ 895 ms vs. M ⫽ 844 ms), t(31) ⫽
2.93, p ⬍ .01, d ⫽ 1.05, mind-set groups showed a significant
increase in response time when evaluating high- versus lowambivalence objects. In contrast, the implemental mind-set group
showed only a marginal ambivalence effect, as they responded
quickly no matter whether high- versus low-ambivalence objects
had to be evaluated (M ⫽ 796 ms vs. M ⫽ 777 ms), t(31) ⫽ 1.82,
p ⫽ .08, d ⫽ 0.65.5

Discussion
In this experiment, we found that individuals induced into an
implemental mind-set evidenced faster evaluative responding as
compared to individuals induced into either a deliberative or
neutral mind-set. This is consistent with prior work that found an
implemental mind-set facilitated faster behavioral judgments (see
Pösl, 1994, as cited in Gollwitzer & Bayer, 1999). Note that the
increased accessibility demonstrated by the implemental mind-set
group seemed to be more pronounced when they evaluated objects
that were known to elicit relatively high amounts of ambivalence.
This enhanced effect of an implemental mind-set for objects that
had the potential to elicit weak (ambivalent) attitudes supports our
claim that an implemental mind-set increases the strength associated with people’s attitudes. This seems especially relevant to
Bargh et al.’s (1992, p. 896) comment that the act of suppressing
competing dominant and nondominant responses toward objects
requires attentional resources. The results of the current experiment suggest that the act of suppressing such competing evaluative
responses may be quite easy while in an implemental mind-set.

Experiment 4: Does an Implemental Mind-Set Improve
Attitude–Behavior Correspondence?
In our first three experiments, we used a variety of approaches
to examine the impact of an implemental mind-set on attitude
strength, including measures of extremity, ambivalence, and accessibility. Regardless of which method was used, our results
5

The following section presents results that were outside the scope of
our hypotheses. Replicating the results from Bargh et al. (1992, p. 897),
analyses revealed a significant main effect of evaluation, F(1, 93) ⫽ 69.10,
p ⬍.001, with participants taking longer to report bad (M ⫽ 874 ms, SD ⫽
200) rather than good evaluations (M ⫽ 820 ms, SD ⫽ 192). These main
effects were qualified by a significant interaction effect between ambivalence and evaluation, F(1, 93) ⫽ 21.67, p ⬍.001. Paired samples t-tests
revealed that the difference in response time for high- versus lowambivalence objects was more pronounced for bad (M ⫽ 932 ms, SD ⫽
241 vs. M ⫽ 842 ms, SD ⫽ 186), t(95) ⫽ 8.73, p ⬍ .001, d ⫽ 1.79, rather
than good evaluations (M ⫽ 828 ms, SD ⫽ 199 vs. M ⫽807 ms, SD ⫽
202), t(95) ⫽ 2.39, p ⬍ .05, d ⫽ 0.49.

404
indicate that the activation of an implemental mind-set led to
increased attitude strength toward objects that were unrelated to
the decision that triggered the mind-set. The repeated failure to
observe any effect of a deliberative mind-set as compared to a
neutral mind-set seems to suggest that the main impact of selfregulatory mind-sets on the examined aspects of attitude strength
derives from the evaluative focus activated by the postdecisional
planning mode of goal pursuit. Given that a deliberative mind-set
has failed to show any effects on attitude strength thus far, this
experiment exclusively examines the effects of an implemental
mind-set relative to a neutral mind-set. Specifically, we examine
whether the effects of an implemental mind-set on the evaluative
system are substantive enough to increase the predictive power of
attitudes for behavior. Indeed, one of the hallmark indicators of
attitude strength is an increased correspondence between attitudes
and relevant behavior (see Petty & Krosnick, 1995).
Theorists (e.g., Brehm, 1956; Wicklund & Brehm, 1976) have
long suggested that when action must be maintained toward an
object, individuals naturally focus on their dominant evaluative
reaction toward the object, exhibiting what some have labeled as
an “unequivocal action orientation” (Jones & Gerard, 1967; see
also Gerard, 1992; Harmon-Jones & Harmon-Jones, 2002). For
example, White and Gerard (1981) found that the more immediate
the transaction with a chosen alternative, the greater the tendency
to enhance one’s evaluation of the chosen alternative over the
nonchosen alternative; when action was extremely delayed, no
such evaluative spreading of alternatives occurred. In essence,
when action must be carried out, individuals seem to naturally
drown out any extraneous evaluative input from nondominant
tendencies that might cloud their commitment by placing extra
emphasis on their dominant evaluations.
We assume that when individuals consider objects while in an
implemental mind-set, they respond toward objects as if action
must be carried out toward them. Accordingly, when individuals
report their attitude toward objects while in an implemental mindset, they are likely to provide an attitude that has less-extraneous
evaluative variables associated with it (i.e., an attitude based on an
evaluatively one-sided focus). Consequently, we hypothesized that
when individuals eventually engage in action toward an object, the
attitude that is reported while in an implemental mind-set should
serve as a better predictor of how they act. It is important to
reiterate that we predicted that this effect would occur even though
action is called for after the implemental mind-set is no longer
active. The fact that action is called for should naturally lead
people to narrow their focus on their dominant evaluative reactions
(White & Gerard, 1981), making the behavior more in line with the
attitude that was initially reported while in an implemental mindset.

Procedure and Materials
This experiment was longitudinal with data collected at two
time points separated by at least 7 days. At the first time point,
participants were induced into either an implemental or neutral
mind-set prior to responding to a question that accessed their
attitude toward the focal object—low-fat dieting. Seven days after
participants sent their responses to the experimenter via e-mail, we
sent participants two follow-up questions via e-mail that assessed
their eating behavior over the past week.
Out of the 116 who completed the attitude assessment at Time
1, 104 completed the behavior assessment at Time 2 (90% response rate). There were no significant differences between those
participants who did and those who did not respond to the behavior
assessment in attitude, t(114) ⫽ 1.30, p ⫽ .20. Also, there was no
significant difference (t ⬍ 1) between the implemental and neutral
mind-set groups in the number of hours it took them to respond to
the follow-up questions.
Mind-set manipulation. Disguised as a questionnaire about the
type of activities that people engage in, the same procedures used
in Experiment 3 to assign participants to the implemental or
neutral mind-set conditions were used in the current experiment.
Dependent measures. After participants completed the mindset manipulation, they encountered a statement informing them
that the experimenter was interested in their attitude toward a
certain object: dieting. Participants’ attitude toward eating a lowfat diet was then measured by means of the following 7-point
rating scale: “Eating a low-fat diet in the future is . . .?” The
answer scale ranged from ⫺3 (unpleasant) to 3 ( pleasant). After
the attitude assessment, participants answered demographic questions. After participants completed the computer program, an
electronic file containing the participants’ responses was automatically created and saved onto their desktop. Participants were
instructed to send this response file to the experimenter via e-mail.
Seven days after the experimenter received participants’ response
files, participants were contacted via e-mail and asked two questions about their eating behavior over the past week. Specifically,
participants’ eating behavior was measured by means of the following 7-point rating scales: “I have eaten a low-fat diet in the last
week,” with responses ranged from ⫺3 (strongly disagree) to 3
(strongly agree), and “How often did you eat a low-fat diet in the
last week?,” with responses ranged from ⫺3 (never) to 3 (frequently). We created an index of low-fat eating behavior by
averaging participants’ responses to these two items (r ⫽ .93). We
adopted our attitude and behavior measures from Armitage and
Conner’s (2000) studies.

Results
Content of Manipulation

Method
Participants
Participants were 116 students (92 women, 24 men) enrolled in
one of several psychology courses who participated in partial
fulfillment of a course requirement. The procedure for recruiting
participants and collecting data was the same as that used in
Experiment 2 with the following additions.

We found that 39.4% of participants’ activities and projects
dealt with career-related issues (e.g., attending class, securing a
good score on a standardized test), 42.6% dealt with lifestylerelated issues (e.g. drinking coffee, finding an affordable apartment), and 18.0% dealt with interpersonal issues (e.g., talking to
friends on the phone, getting a significant other to be more expressive). Nine participants in the implemental mind-set condition
planned out a personal project that dealt with eating a healthy diet
and were thus dropped from the analysis. Thus, we were left with

405
a sample of 95 participants (75 women, 20 men), with 49 and 46
participants in the neutral and implemental mind-set conditions,
respectively.

Main Analyses
We examined the relationship between participants’ attitude
toward eating a low-fat diet and their behavior toward eating a
low-fat diet. Participants’ gender did not moderate the condition
effect for any of the results reported, and all results are unchanged
after controlling for the effect of participants’ gender; thus, gender
is not discussed further. As expected, the within-condition correlations revealed that the implemental mind-set group evidenced a
higher correlation (r ⫽ .54) than the neutral mind-set group (r ⫽
.22) on their attitude toward eating a low-fat diet and their selfreported behavior of eating a low-fat diet (Z ⫽ 1.79, p ⫽ .06).6

Discussion
An implemental mind-set is posited to increase the strength
associated with people’s attitudes, and several studies have shown
that changes in attitudinal strength properties can lead to better
attitude– behavior relations, including decreases in ambivalence
(Armitage & Conner, 2000) and increases in certainty (Fazio &
Zanna, 1978), accessibility (Fazio, Powell, & Williams, 1989), and
extremity (Petersen & Dutton, 1975). The observed increase in
attitude– behavior correspondence that occurred as a function of an
implemental mind-set is consistent with prior research that has
shown that postdecisional individuals exhibit an unequivocal behavioral orientation (Jones & Gerard, 1967). What is novel about
the current findings, however, is that such an orientation (once
activated) seems to be able to spill over to unrelated objects.
Although the findings from this experiment suggest that the increase in attitude strength that occurs as a function of an implemental mind-set is meaningful enough to enhance the predictability of people’s attitudes for their behavior, the question still
remains as to how exactly an implemental mind-set affects the
strength associated with people’s attitudes.

Method
Participants
Participants were 46 former and current students (25 women, 21
men) recruited via several University of Chicago electronic postings (newsgroup site, Facebook, and listserve notification) who
participated for $10. The procedure for collecting data was the
same as that used in Experiments 2 and 4 with the following
additions.

Procedure and Materials
After receiving the instructions over e-mail, participants were
instructed to respond to the study when no other people were
around in order to minimize distractions. Participants were
randomly assigned to one of three conditions: implemental
mind-set one-sided focus, implemental mind-set two-sided focus, or neutral mind-set. There were 15 participants in each of
the implemental mind-set conditions and 16 participants in the
neutral mind-set condition.
Mind-set manipulation. The procedure used in Experiment 1
to activate an implemental mind-set was applied in the current
experiment. For participants assigned to the implemental mindset one-sided focus condition, after they read the sample letter
they listed three reasons why it could be desirable and easy to
give advice on their chosen romantic area. Note that this onesided evaluative focus resembles the type of biased processing
that has been shown to naturally occur once people enter into
the postdecisional phase of goal pursuit (e.g. Taylor & Gollwitzer, 1995). For participants assigned to the implemental
mind-set two-sided focus condition, after they read the sample
letter they listed three reasons why it could be desirable and
easy to give advice on their chosen area and three reasons why
it could be undesirable and difficult to give advice on their
chosen area. After listing their reasons, participants in the
implemental mind-set conditions responded to the attitude questionnaire. The procedures used in Experiments 3 and 4 to
activate a neutral mind-set were applied in the current

Experiment 5: How Does an Implemental Mind-Set
Affect Attitude Strength?
Throughout the previous studies, we have assumed that the
mechanism behind an implemental mind-set’s affect on attitude
strength is the one-sided analysis of information that occurs after
a decision is made. Of course, it is also possible that simply
making a decision is sufficient to foster increased attitude strength
in general, without necessitating a one-sided focus as the driving
mechanism. Prior mind-set work has never teased apart the act of
deciding and the one- versus two-sided focus. This might not be
surprising, however, given that individuals in a postdecisional state
generally spontaneously tune their thoughts in a one-sided manner
(Taylor & Gollwitzer, 1995). Nevertheless, it is worthwhile to
pinpoint the exact mechanism underlying the effect an implemental mind-set has on attitude strength. The current experiment set
out to examine this mechanism, with ambivalence and certainty as
the focal aspects of attitude strength to test our hypothesis.

6
It is worth noting that we also measured the amount of time participants took to report their attitude in Experiment 4. It is interesting that, as
was found in Experiment 3, results revealed that the implemental mind-set
group took significantly less time (M ⫽ 7.04 s, SD ⫽ 2.49) than the neutral
mind-set group (M ⫽ 8.25 s, SD ⫽ 2.95), t(93) ⫽ 2.16, p ⬍ .05, d ⫽ 0.45,
to report their attitude. We created an index of attitude– behavior correspondence (the absolute distance between the ratings on the attitude and
behavior scales). Analyses showed that the correlation between response
time and correspondence was practically zero in both the implemental (r ⫽
⫺.08) and neutral (r ⫽ .01) mind-set groups, suggesting that the observed
difference in accessibility did not mediate the effect of the implemental
mind-set on correspondence. It should be noted, however, that participants
were not instructed to respond as quickly as possible when reporting their
evaluation, as has been done in prior accessibility and attitude– behavior
correspondence studies (e.g., Fazio et al., 1989).

406
experiment.7 After participants in the neutral mind-set condition described seven things that they normally did during a
typical day, they responded to the attitude questionnaire.
Dependent measure. At the beginning of the attitude questionnaire, participants were asked to indicate their reaction toward a
topic that was supposedly being debated within the United
States—whether the list of convicted sex offenders should be made
available to the general public rather than just the police. Specifically, participants read the following:
Should the list of convicted sex offenders be made available to the
general public rather than just the police? On the one hand, people
believe that making the registered sex offender list known to the
general public rather than just the police would help citizens decide on
where they want to live and where to keep children from playing
unsupervised, thereby lowering the incident of future offenses. On the
other hand, people believe that making the registered sex offender list
known to the general public rather than just the police would make it
so difficult for offenders to find a place to live and work that it would
lead offenders to avoid registering as a sex offender in the first place,
thereby increasing the incident of future offenses.

In order to reduce the likelihood that participants already held a
strong attitude toward this issue, we excluded 1 participant from
the analyses who reported having direct contact with a sex offender in her neighborhood.
We assessed how ambivalent people were toward the issue using
the following 7-point rating scales: “I have strong mixed emotions
both for and against making the list of convicted sex offenders
available to the general public rather than just the police” (reverse
scored) and “I do not find myself feeling torn between the two sides
of the issue of making the list of convicted sex offenders available to
the general public rather than just the police,” on scales ranged from
⫺3 (strongly disagree) to 3 (strongly agree). Participants were also
asked “To what extent are you indecisive when it comes to making
the list of convicted sex offenders available to the general public
rather than just the police?” That scale ranged from 1 (not at all) to 7
(very much). These items were adopted from previous ambivalence
studies (Newby-Clark, McGregor, & Zanna, 2001; Priester & Petty,
1996). After recoding the scale for the last item to range from ⫺3 to
3, we created an index of ambivalence by averaging responses to the
three items (␣ ⫽ .93). We also assessed how certain people were
about their attitude toward the issue using the following 7-point rating
scale: “How certain are you about your attitude toward making the list
of convicted sex offenders available to the general public rather than
just the police?” The scale ranged from 1 (not at all) to 7 (very much).
As expected, certainty scores were significantly negatively correlated
with ambivalence scores (r ⫽ ⫺.69). Finally, participants’ demographics were assessed.

Results
Attitude Ambivalence
Participants’ ambivalence score was entered into an ANOVA, with
mind-set condition (implemental one-sided, implemental two-sided,
and neutral) as a between-participant variable. As expected, the condition effect was significant, F(2, 43) ⫽ 3.36, p ⬍ .05. Specific
comparisons revealed that the implemental mind-set one-sided group
evidenced a significantly lower amount of ambivalence (M ⫽ 0.16,
SD ⫽ 1.85) compared to the implemental mind-set two-sided group

(M ⫽ 1.82, SD ⫽ 1.86), t(28) ⫽ 2.46, p ⬍ .05, d ⫽ 0.93. Participants
assigned to the neutral mind-set condition scored in the middle (M ⫽
1.23, SD ⫽ 1.64), although neither significantly above those in the
implemental mind-set one-sided condition, t(28) ⫽ 1.71, p ⫽ .10, d ⫽
0.64, nor significantly below those in the implemental mind-set twosided condition (t ⬍ 1).

Attitude Certainty
Participants’ certainty score was entered into an ANOVA, with
mind-set condition as a between-participant variable. The condition effect was significant, F(2, 43) ⫽ 4.90, p ⬍ .05 (see Figure 1).
Specific comparisons revealed that the implemental mind-set onesided group evidenced a significantly higher level of certainty (M
⫽ 5.73, SD ⫽ 1.53) than the implemental mind-set two-sided (M
⫽ 4.07, SD ⫽ 1.58 ), t(28) ⫽ 2.93, p ⬍ .01, d ⫽ 1.11, and neutral
mind-set (M ⫽ 4.25, SD ⫽ 1.69), t(29) ⫽ 2.55, p ⬍ .05, d ⫽ 0.95,
groups. No significant difference was observed between the implemental mind-set two-sided and neutral mind-set groups (t ⬍ 1).8

Discussion
Throughout the current set of studies, we have assumed that the
mechanism behind an implemental mind-set’s effect on attitude
strength is the one-sided analysis of information that occurs after
a decision is made rather than the simple act of deciding itself. In
Experiment 5, we tested our assumption by taking two groups who
made a decision on how to act and varying their evaluative focus.
Whereas one group engaged in a one-sided evaluation of their
decision, the other group engaged in a two-sided evaluation of
their decision. Had the act of deciding itself been sufficient to
increase attitude strength overall, those individuals who made a
decision on how to act and who analyzed both sides of their
decision would have evidenced the same level of attitude strength
as those who analyzed only one side of their decision. Critically,
the findings showed that it was the evaluatively one-sided analysis
7

Results revealed that the implemental one-sided and two-sided groups did
not significantly differ in the extent to which they believed they were reading
about a particular content area in their sample letter. Specifically, 67% of
participants in one- and two-sided groups choose the honesty area to give
advice on and expected to receive a sample letter from that supposed area.
8
We tested whether participants’ level of certainty mediated the effects of
mind-set condition on ambivalence by performing a multiple regression analysis testing the linear effect of condition (two-sided group coded ⫺1, neutral
group coded 0, one-sided group coded 1) and quadratic effect of condition
(two-sided and one-sided groups coded ⫺1, neutral group coded 2). Results
revealed that the linear effect of condition on ambivalence was significant, B ⫽
⫺0.36, t(43) ⫽ 2.56, p ⫽ .01, and the quadratic effect was not significant (B ⫽
0.06, t ⬍ 1). When we reran the analysis controlling for certainty, the linear
effect was no longer significant (B ⫽ ⫺0.11, t ⬍ 1), but the effect of certainty
was significant, B ⫽ ⫺0.66, t(42) ⫽ 5.35, p ⬍ .001. We also tested whether
participants’ level of ambivalence mediated the effects of mind-set condition
on certainty. Results revealed that the linear effect of condition on certainty
was significant, B ⫽ 0.39, t(43) ⫽ 2.84, p ⬍ .01, and the quadratic effect was
not significant, B ⫽ ⫺0.18, t(43) ⫽ 1.31, p ⫽ .20. When we reran the analysis
controlling for ambivalence, the linear effect was no longer significant, B ⫽
0.17, t(42) ⫽ 1.45, p ⫽ .15, but the effect of ambivalence was significant, B ⫽
⫺0.62, t(42) ⫽ 5.35, p ⬍ .001. Such results can be attributed to the high
degree of multicollinearity between ambivalence and certainty.

407

7
6.5
6
5.5
Attitude Certainty

5
4.5

implemental one-sided focus

4

neutral
implemental two-sided focus

3.5
3
2.5
2
1.5
1
Mindset Condition

Figure 1. Mean attitude certainty as a function of mind-set (implemental one-sided focus, neutral, and
implemental two-sided focus; Experiment 5).

of information, rather than simply the act of deciding itself, that
fostered a spillover of decreased ambivalence and increased certainty overall.

General Discussion
Across the current set of studies, we observed that an implemental mind-set enhances the strength associated with people’s
attitudes. Such enhanced attitude strength was reflected by an
increase in attitudinal extremity (Experiment 1), decrease in attitudinal ambivalence (Experiments 2 and 5), increase in attitudinal
accessibility (Experiments 3), increase in attitudinal certainty (Experiments 5), and an increase in attitude– behavior correspondence
(Experiment 4). It is important to note that what makes these
results particularly striking is the fact that the cognitive approach
adopted by individuals in an implemental phase of action was
found to transfer or spill over to issues that were completely
unrelated to their particular goal pursuits, reflecting a general
increase in attitude strength. Of course, one might ask what mechanisms are involved in this general increase in attitude strength that
occurs as a function of an implemental mind-set.
An implemental mind-set presumably makes any knowledge
that helps to solve the task of the postdecisional phase of goal
pursuit more accessible (Gollwitzer, 1990). Part of this knowledge
is episodic and relates to information about the specific problem at
hand (i.e., the decision to be carried out). The other part includes
procedures that help individuals plan and initiate action in general,
procedures that involve processing information in an evaluatively
one-sided or partial manner. It is this evaluatively one-sided approach that postdecisional individuals naturally take toward goalrelevant information, thus achieving stronger attitudes (increased

commitment and reduced uncertainty) toward their goal pursuits.
Findings from our last experiment suggest that it is this evaluatively one-sided analysis that produces stronger attitudes toward
issues in general, that is, even toward issues that are not linked to
the goal pursuit at hand.

Mind-Set Differences
At this point, one might be wondering why we repeatedly found
no differences between our deliberative and neutral mind-set
groups on any of our indicators of attitude strength. One might
predict that if an implemental mind-set transfers an increase in
attitude strength, then a deliberative mind-set must transfer a
decrease in attitude strength, given that it precedes the activation of
an implemental mind-set in the phases of goal pursuit. As mentioned at the beginning of this article, however, such a prediction
rests on the assumption that a neutral mind-set can be created in
the first place (see Armor & Taylor, 2003, p. 89; also see Campbell
& Stanley, 1963, p. 13). For instance, Gagné and Lydon (2001b, p.
1151) suggested that a lack of difference between a deliberative
and neutral mind-set group might simply be explained by the
generalized state of uncertainty experienced by university students
while taking part in psychological experiments, which might be
particularly the case when dealing with attitude issues (e.g., policies toward foreigners, policies toward sex offenders) that students
are probably unfamiliar with and have not spent much time thinking about beforehand.
Notwithstanding the possible explanation stated above, it is also
important to draw attention to the fact that while some studies in
the tradition of mind-set theory have found no differences between
deliberative and neutral mind-set groups (Brandstätter & Frank,

408
2002, Study 1; Gagné & Lydon, 2001a, Study 3; 2001b, Study 2;
Harmon-Jones & Harmon-Jones, 2002, Study 2; Taylor & Gollwitzer, 1995, Studies 1 and 2), other studies have found no
differences between implemental and neutral mind-set groups
(Fujita et al., 2007, Study 3; Gollwitzer & Kinney, 1989, Study 2;
Heckhausen & Gollwitzer, 1987, Study 2; Taylor & Gollwitzer,
1995, Study 1). Moreover, other studies have found theoretically
consistent differences between all three mind-set groups (Armor &
Taylor, 2003, Preliminary Study; Gagné & Lydon, 2001b, Study 1;
Taylor & Gollwitzer, 1995, Study 2). Such inconsistent findings
might also be due to the existence of an unexplored individual
difference in chronic preferences for deliberative versus implemental mind-sets. Indeed, recent work by Grant, Gollwitzer, and
Oettingen (2006) supports this possibility, and we look forward to
additional work that directly tests this idea.

cognitive or affective. Regarding our demonstration of increased
attitude– behavior correspondence that occurred as a function of an
implemental mind-set, one could argue that the behavior that we
measured (dieting) is one that has both consummatory (appetitive
concerns) and instrumental (health concerns) aspects, and therefore it is difficult to draw any clear conclusions from the current
findings about whether an implemental mind-set differentially
affects the correspondence between attitudes and behaviors that
are consummatory or instrumental in nature. Indeed, Tesser and
Martin have noted (e.g., Tesser, Martin, & Mendolia, 1995) the
difficulty in identifying behavior as clearly consummatory or
instrumental. We believe future research should specifically tackle
this issue by examining the specific type of focus (cognitive or
affective) that occurs as a function of an implemental mind-set and
by using paradigms that make explicit the nature of the behavior
(e.g., see Miller & Tessar, 1986).9

Alternative Mechanisms
Mind-Sets and Attitude Strength

One might question whether elevations in mood might account
for the differences we found between the different mind-set conditions. To us, this explanation seems unlikely given that if the
activation of an implemental mind-set did indeed facilitate a better
mood, then one would have expected to find that attitudes expressed in the current set of experiments were consistently more
positive, something we failed to observe (see Experiments 1 and
4). Moreover, any differences in mood or attitude valence could
not account for the differences in attitudinal certainty that we
observed (see Experiment 5). Second, one might ask whether our
results can be explained by differences in the amount of cognitive
effort expended by the groups. This explanation also seems unlikely given that we failed to find any differences between our
experimental groups in stimulus recall or effort that went into
responding (see Experiment 1). Last, one might wonder whether
our results can be accounted for by differences in the topics our
experimental groups thought about before responding to our dependent measures. We believe that the results of Experiments 1
and 5 effectively speak against this alternative explanation, specifically because our experimental groups were exposed to the
same information (romantic relationship advice materials) before
evidencing differences in attitude strength. Moreover, several steps
were taken across Experiments 2 to 4 to omit all responses from
the analyses that shared any semantic relationship to the content of
what our experimental groups thought about beforehand, and a
consistent pattern of results still emerged. Therefore, a content
explanation also does not seem tenable.

The current experiments focused on whether an implemental
mind-set increases the strength associated with particular aspects
of attitudes identified by Pomerantz and her colleagues (Pomerantz
et al., 1995; Tordesillas et al., 1994) as having to do with the
confidence people have in their attitudes. Future work should
examine whether an implemental mind-set also affects the consequences of such increased attitude strength, including an attitude’s
persistence over time and resistance to change. It is important to
recognize that Pomerantz and her colleagues also found that certain aspects of attitude strength (ego involvement, importance,
knowledgeability) centered on how connected individuals’ attitudes were to their values and belief system. They found that
increases on such properties of attitude strength were associated
with what they referred to as an “open-minded orientation” toward
attitude-incongruent information (Pomerantz et al., 1995, pp. 416 –
417). Pomerantz and her colleague’s identification of aspects of
attitude strength that are related to individuals’ values and associated with an open-minded orientation fit well with the deliberative
mind-set (Gollwitzer, 1990; 2003). As the deliberative mind-set
has been shown to reflect an open-minded consideration of available information (Fujita et al., 2007; Heckhausen & Gollwitzer,
1987), it undoubtedly centers on considering one’s values and
belief system while attempting to narrow down which of the many
desires will be pursued. Future research should therefore be directed at testing whether a deliberative mind-set affects valuerelated aspects of attitude strength.

Mind-Sets and Attitude–Behavior Relations

Conclusion

It is interesting to consider whether an implemental mind-set
will always lead to attitudes that predict behavior better, particularly in light of the work by Miller and Tesser (1992) on the
mismatch model of attitudes and behavior. Miller and Tesser have
argued that attitudes based on cognition are better predictors of
instrumental behaviors (behaviors engaged in for distal goals),
whereas attitudes based on affect are better predictors of consummatory behaviors (behaviors engaged in for their own sake, enjoyment, or interest value). Throughout the current article, we have
remained agnostic as to whether the one-sided focus that occurs as
a function of an implemental mind-set is one that is primarily

The present line of research was rooted in the assumption that
the evaluative system plays a key role in how individuals navigate
through the social world. Mind-set theory proposes that one of the
key tasks that individuals must resolve in the postdecisional planning phase of goal pursuit is to maintain strong commitment to
their goals. The findings from the present set of experiments
illustrate that increased levels of attitude strength will occur as an
unintended consequence of solving this task. Together, the results
9

We are grateful to an anonymous reviewer for raising this issue.

409
from the current set of experiments offer great theoretical promise
for the continued integration of goal pursuit and attitude research.

References
Abelson, R. P. (1995). Attitude extremity. In R. E. Petty & J. A. Krosnick
(Eds.), Attitude strength: Antecedents and consequences (pp. 25– 41).
Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Ach, N. (1910). Über den Willensakt und das Temperament [Temperament
and the act of willing]. Leipzig, Germany: Quelle & Meyer.
Armitage, C. J., & Conner, M. (2000). Attitudinal ambivalence: A test of
three key hypotheses. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 26,
1421–1432.
Armor, D. A., & Taylor, S. E. (2003). The effects of mindset on behavior:
Self-regulation in deliberative and implemental frames of mind. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 29, 86 –95.
Bargh, J. A., Chaiken, S., Govender, R., & Pratto, F. (1992). The generality
of the automatic attitude activation effect. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 62, 893–912.
Bargh, J. A., & Chartrand, T. L. (2000). The mind in the middle: A
practical guide to priming and automaticity research. In H. T. Reis &
C. M. Judd (Eds.), Handbook of research methods in social and personality psychology (pp. 253–285). New York: Cambridge University
Press.
Bassili, J. N. (1996). Meta-judgmental versus operative indexes of psychological attributes: The case of measures of attitude strength. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 71, 637– 653.
Bayer, U. C., & Gollwitzer, P. M. (2005). Mindset effects on information
search in self-evaluation. European Journal of Social Psychology, 35,
313–327.
Brandstätter, V., & Frank, E. (2002). Effects of deliberative and implemental mind-sets on persistence in goal-directed behavior. Personality
and Social Psychology Bulletin, 28, 1366 –1378.
Brehm, J. W. (1956). Postdecision changes in the desirability of alternatives. Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology, 52, 384 –389.
Brömer, P. (1998). Ambivalent attitudes and information processing. Swiss
Journal of Psychology, 57,225–234.
Cacioppo, J. T., von Hippel, W., & Ernst, J. M. (1997). Mapping cognitive
structures and processes through verbal content: The thought-listing
technique. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 65, 928 –940.
Campbell, D. T., & Stanley, J. C. (1963). Experimental and quasiexperimental designs for research. Boston: Houghton, Mifflin and Company.
Chen, S., Shechter, D., & Chaiken, S. (1996). Getting at the truth or getting
along: Accuracy- vs. impression-motivated heuristic and systematic
processing. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 71, 262–275.
De Liver, Y., Henderson, M. D., & Gollwitzer, P. M. (2003). [The effects
of self-regulatory mindsets on subjective ambivalence towards goalrelevant objects and events.] Unpublished raw data.
De Liver, Y., Van der Pligt, J., & Wigboldus, D. (2007). Positive and
negative associations underlying ambivalent attitudes. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 43, 319 –326.
Downing, J. W., Judd, C. M., & Brauer, M. (1992). Effects of repeated
expressions on attitude extremity. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 63, 17–29.
Fazio, R. H., Chen, J., McDonel, E. C., & Sherman, S. J. (1982). Attitude
accessibility, attitude-behavior consistency, and the strength of the
object-evaluation association. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 18, 339 –357.
Fazio, R. H., Powell, M. C., & Williams, C. J. (1989). The role of attitude
accessibility in the attitude-to-behavior process. Journal of Consumer
Research, 16, 280 –288.
Fazio, R. H., Sanbonmatsu, D. M., Powell, M. C., & Kardes, F. R. (1986).
On the automatic activation of attitudes. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 50, 229 –238.

Fazio, R. H., & Zanna, M. P. (1978). Attitudinal qualities relating to the
strength of the attitude– behavior relationship. Journal of Experimental
Social Psychology, 14, 398 – 408.
Frey, D. (1986). Recent research on selective exposure to information. In
L. Berkowitz (Ed.), Advances in experimental social psychology (Vol.
19, pp. 41– 80). Orlando, FL: Academic Press.
Fujita, K., Gollwitzer, P. M., & Oettingen, G. (2007). Mindsets and
pre-conscious open-mindedness to incidental information. Journal of
Experimental Social Psychology, 43, 48 – 61.
Gagné, F. M., & Lydon, J. E. (2001a). Mind-set and close relationships:
When bias leads to (in)accurate predictions. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 81, 85–96.
Gagné, F. M., & Lydon, J. E. (2001b). Mindset and relationship illusions:
The moderating effects of domain specificity and relationship commitment. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 27, 1144 –1155.
Galinsky, A. D., & Moskowitz, G. B. (2000). Counterfactuals as behavioral
primes: Priming the simulation heuristic and consideration of alternatives. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 36, 384 – 409.
Gerard, H. B. (1967). Choice difficulty, dissonance and the decision
sequence. Journal of Personality, 35, 91–108.
Gerard, H. B. (1992). Dissonance theory: A cognitive psychology with an
engine. Psychological Inquiry, 3, 323–327.
Gollwitzer, P. M. (1990). Action phases and mind-sets. In E. T. Higgins &
R. M. Sorrentino (Eds.), Handbook of motivation and cognition: Foundations of social behavior (Vol. 2, pp. 53–92). New York: Guilford
Press.
Gollwitzer, P. M. (2003). Why we thought that action mindsets affect
illusions of control. Psychological Inquiry, 14, 261–269.
Gollwitzer, P. M., & Bayer, U. (1999). Deliberative versus implemental
mindsets in the control of action. In S. Chaiken & Y. Trope (Eds.),
Dual-process theories in social psychology (pp. 403– 422). New York:
Guilford Press
Gollwitzer, P. M., Bayer, U., & Wasel, W. (1998). Deliberative versus
implemental mindsets: The issue of openmindedness. Unpublished
manuscript, Universität Konstanz, Konstanz, Germany.
Gollwitzer, P. M., Fujita, K., & Oettingen, G. (2004). Planning and the
implementation of goals. In R. F. Baumeister & K. D. Vohs (Eds.),
Handbook of self-regulation: Research, theory, and applications (pp.
211–228). New York: Guilford Press.
Gollwitzer, P. M., Heckhausen, H., & Steller, B. (1990). Deliberative and
implemental mind-sets: Cognitive tuning toward congruous thoughts
and information. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 59,
1119 –1127.
Gollwitzer, P. M., & Kinney, R. F. (1989). Effects of deliberative and
implemental mind-sets on illusion of control. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 56, 531–542.
Grant, H., Gollwitzer, P. M., & Oettingen, G. (2006). Individual differences in the self-regulation of goal pursuit by forming implementation
intentions. Unpublished manuscript, Lehigh University, Bethlehem, PA.
Harmon-Jones, E., & Harmon-Jones, C. (2002). Testing the action-based
model of cognitive dissonance: The effect of action orientation on
postdecisional attitudes. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 28,
711–723.
Heckhausen, H., & Gollwitzer, P. M. (1987). Thought contents and cognitive functioning in motivational versus volitional states of mind. Motivation and Emotion, 11, 101–120.
Higgins, E. T., Kruglanski, A. W., & Pierro, A. (2003). Regulatory mode:
Locomotion and assessment as distinct orientations. In M. P. Zanna
(Ed.), Advances in experimental social psychology (Vol. 35, pp. 293–
344). New York: Academic Press.
Huckfeldt, R., & Sprague, J. (2000). Political consequences of inconsistency: The accessibility and stability of abortion attitudes. Political
Psychology, 21, 57–79.
Hugenberg, K., Bodenhausen, G. V., & McLain, M. (2006). Framing

410
discrimination: Effects of inclusion versus exclusion mind-sets on stereotypic judgments, Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 91,
1020 –1031.
Jones, E. E., & Gerard, H. (1967). Foundations of social psychology.
Oxford, England: Wiley.
Kaplan, K. J. (1972). On the ambivalence–indifference problem in attitude
theory and measurement: A suggested modification of the semantic
differential technique. Psychological Review, 77, 361–372.
Kray, L. J., Galinsky, A. D., & Wong, E. M. (2006). Thinking within the
box: The relational processing style elicited by counterfactual mind-sets.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 91, 33– 48.
Krosnick, J. A. (1988). The role of attitude importance in social evaluation:
A study of policy preferences, presidential candidate evaluations, and
voting behavior. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 55,
196 –210.
Krosnick, J. A., Boninger, D. S., Chuang, Y. C., Berent, M. K., & Carnot,
C. G. (1993). Attitude strength: One construct or many related constructs? Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 65, 1132–1151.
Krosnick, J. A., & Petty, R. E. (1995). Attitude strength: An overview. In
R. E. Petty, & J. A. Krosnick (Eds.), Attitude strength: Antecedents and
consequences: Ohio State University Series on Attitudes and Persuasion
(Vol. 4, pp. 1–24). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Kruglanski, A. W., Thompson, E. P., Higgins, E. T., Atash, M. N., Pierro,
A., Shah, J. Y., & Spiegel, S. (2000). To “do the right thing” or to “just
do it”: Locomotion and assessment as distinct self-regulatory imperatives. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 79, 793– 815.
Kuhl, J. (1985). Volitional mediation of cognition-behavior consistency:
Self-regulatory processes and action versus state orientation. In J. Kuhl
& J. Beckman (Eds.), Action control: From cognition to behavior (pp.
101–128). Berlin, Germany: Springer-Verlag.
Külpe, O. (1904). Versuche über Abstraktion [Experiments on abstraction].
Bericht über den 1. Kongre␤ für Experimentelle Psychologie, 1, 56 – 68.
Miller, M., & Tesser, A. (1986). Effects of affective and cognitive focus on
the attitude-behavior relationship. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 51, 259 –269.
Miller, M., & Tesser, A. (1992). The role of beliefs and feelings in guiding
behavior: The mismatch model. In L. Martin & A. Tesser (Eds.), The
construction of social judgments (pp. 277–300). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Newby-Clark, I. R., McGregor, I., & Zanna, M. P. (2002). Thinking and
caring about cognitive inconsistency: When and for whom does attitudinal ambivalence feel uncomfortable? Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 82, 157–166.
Nordgren, L. F., van Harreveld, F., & Van der Pligt, J. (2006). Ambivalence, discomfort, and motivated information processing. Journal of
Experimental Social Psychology, 42, 252–258.
Petersen, K. K., & Dutton, J. E. (1975). Centrality, extremity, intensity:
Neglected variables in research on attitude-behavior consistency. Social
Forces, 54, 393– 414.
Petty, R. E., & Krosnick, J. A. (1995). Attitude strength: Antecedents and
consequences: Ohio State University Series on Attitudes and Persuasion
(Vol. 4). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Pomerantz, E. M., Chaiken, S., & Tordesillas, R. S. (1995). Attitude
strength and resistance processes. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 69, 408 – 419.
Pösl, I. (1994). Wiederaufnahme unterbrochener Handlungen: Effekte der

Bewusstseinslagen des Abwägens und Planens [Deliberative and implemental mindset effects on the resumption of disrupted activities]. Unpublished master’s thesis, University of Munich, Germany.
Priester, J. R., & Petty, R. E. (1996). The gradual threshold model of
ambivalence: Relating the positive and negative bases of attitudes to
subjective ambivalence. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
71, 431– 449.
Puca, R. M. (2001). Preferred difficulty and subjective probability in
different action phases. Motivation and Emotion, 25, 307–326.
Puca, R. M., & Schmalt, H.-D. (2001). The influence of the achievement
motive on spontaneous thoughts in pre- and postdecisional action
phases. Personality & Social Psychology Bulletin, 27, 302–308.
Raden, D. (1985). Strength related attitude dimensions. Social Psychology
Quarterly, 48, 312–330.
Rees, H. J., & Israel, H. E. (1935). An investigation of the establishment
and operation of mental sets. Psychological Monographs, 46, 1–26.
Sassenberg, K., & Moskowitz, G. B. (2005). Do not stereotype, think
different! Overcoming automatic stereotype activation by mindset priming. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 41, 506 –514.
Sassenberg, K., Moskowitz, G. B., Jacoby, J., & Hansen, N. (2007). The
carry-over effect of competition: The impact of competition on prejudice
towards uninvolved outgroups. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 43, 529 –538.
Smith, E. R., & Branscombe, N. R. (1987). Procedurally mediated social
inferences: The case of category accessibility effects. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 23, 361–382.
Taylor, S., & Gollwitzer, P. M. (1995). Effects of mindset on positive
illusions. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 69, 213–226.
Tesser, A., Martin, L., & Mendolia, M. (1995). The impact of thought on
attitude extremity and attitude-behavior consistency. In R. E. Petty, &
J. A. Krosnick (Eds.), Attitude strength: Antecedents and consequences:
Ohio State University Series on Attitudes and Persuasion (Vol.4, pp.
1–24). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Tordesillas, R. S., Pomerantz, E. M., Chaiken, S., & Zimmerman, J.
(1994). Unpublished data set, New York University, New York.
Tormala, Z. L., & Petty, R. (2002). What doesn’t kill me makes me
stronger: The effects of resisting persuasion on attitude certainty. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 83, 1298 –1313.
Visser, P. S., Bizer, G. Y., & Krosnick, J. A. (2006). Exploring the latent
structure of strength-related attitude attributes. Advances in Experimental Social Psychology, 38, 1– 67.
Visser, P. S., Krosnick, J. A., & Simmons, J. P. (2003). Distinguishing the
cognitive and behavioral consequences of attitude and certainty: A new
approach to testing the common-factor hypothesis. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 39, 118 –141.
Visser, P. S., & Mirabile, R. R. (2004). Attitudes in the social context: The
impact of social network composition on individual-level attitude
strength. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 87, 779 –795.
White, G. L., & Gerard, H. B. (1981). Post-decision evaluation of choice
alternatives as a function of valence of alternatives, choice, and expected
delay of choice consequences. Journal of Research in Personality, 15,
371–382.
Wicklund, R. A., & Brehm, J. W. (1976). Perspectives on cognitive
dissonance. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.

411
Appendix A
Stimulus Material Used in Experiments 1 and 5
Sample Honesty (Sexual Experience) Issue Letter
Dear Doctor Love,
I met this person on the Internet three months ago and we talk
everyday through instant messenger. Things are going great. We
talk for hours and we flirt all the time. Plus, we just seem to
connect on a really deep level. This person even sent me a picture,
but I’m too timid to send mine. I’ve been lying that my scanner is
broken and I am unable to send anything. Plus, I’ve kind of led this
person on to believe that I’m better looking than I really am. I think
this person is so hot and I’m sure others would agree. I don’t think
I’m attractive and the only people who think I am are my family

members, so I tend not to believe them. You know how that goes.
“You have a great personality!” “Any person would be lucky to be
with you!” “I wish I looked like you when I was younger!” I am
18 and I have only dated two other people ever. To be honest, I
know I could stand to loose a few pounds. God I want this person
to really like me. It’s not that I think this person is an uncaring
person who only cares about looks. But come on! Aren’t looks a
major factor in a relationship? We seem compatible on many
levels except for that one. Please help!!
Yours truly,
Dishonest Lover (Inexperienced Lover)

Appendix B
Examples of Coded Responses from Experiment 1
Code of ⫺1 (one-sided negative position):

Code of 0 (two-sided positive position):

I don’t think that e-mails between foreigners should be closely
watched. Just because another person is from another country, does
not automatically make him/her a terrorist. America does not control
the world and should not have rights to control other people’s private
conversations.

Code of 0 (two-sided negative position):

Just as cops have a right to search a car or a house on grounds of
reasonable suspicion, the government should have some right over
monitoring foreigners’ email, but what is impermissible is to use that
power indiscriminately, without reasonable grounds of suspicion, and
in ways that may be malicious.

Code of 1 (one-sided positive position):

I believe that privacy is more important than a perceived threat.
Without any judicial support, such as warrants, I do not feel government agencies should be able to read private emails.

I believe that, as the world power, we must do everything necessary
to protect ourselves. If this includes tapping peoples’ phones and
reading peoples’ private emails, then I would be in favor of it.

Appendix C
Attitude Objects Used in Experiment 2
airplanes
bowling
eating fast-food
skim milk
police officers
blind dates
homeless people
clowns
lying to your parents
shopping

exercising
computer hackers
studying
video games
alcohol
cellular phones
condoms
sales clerks
bicycles
gambling

nurses
recycling
pornography
chocolate
politicians
cigarettes
firemen
sex
lawyers

