Journal of Personality and Social Psychology
2008, Vol. 94, No. 2, 231–244

Copyright 2008 by the American Psychological Association
0022-3514/08/$12.00 DOI: 10.1037/0022-3514.94.2.94.2.231

Selective Exposure and Information Quantity: How Different Information
Quantities Moderate Decision Makers’ Preference for Consistent and
Inconsistent Information
Peter Fischer

Stefan Schulz-Hardt

University of Exeter

University of Göttingen

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Dieter Frey
Ludwig-Maximilians-University Munich
Empirical evidence on selective exposure to information after decisions is contradictory: Whereas many
studies have found a preference for information that is consistent with one’s prior decision, some have
found a preference for inconsistent information. The authors propose that different available information
quantities moderate these contradictory findings. Four studies confirmed this expectation. When confronted with 10 pieces of information, decision makers systematically preferred decision-consistent
information, whereas when confronted with only 2 pieces of information, they strongly preferred
decision-inconsistent information (Study 1). This effect was not due to differences in processing
complexity (Study 2) or dissonance processes (Study 3) but could be traced back to different salient
selection criteria: When confronted with 2 pieces of information, the salient selection criterion was
information direction (consistent vs. inconsistent), which caused a preference for inconsistent information. In contrast, when confronted with more than 2 pieces of information, the salient selection criterion
was expected information quality, which caused a preference for consistent information (Study 4).
Keywords: information seeking, selective exposure, information quantity, selection criterion, information
direction

ual and group decisions (for individual decision making see Frey,
1986; Jonas, Greenberg, & Frey, 2003; Jonas, Schulz-Hardt, Frey,
& Thelen, 2001; for group decision making see Kray & Galinsky,
2003; Schulz-Hardt, Frey, Lüthgens, & Moscovici, 2000; SchulzHardt, Jochims, & Frey, 2002). Although there is a great deal of
research supporting the existence of the selective-exposure phenomenon, other influential research in this area has unexpectedly
found that decision makers can also exhibit a strong preference for
inconsistent information (e.g., Freedman, 1965; Freedman &
Sears, 1965; Sears, 1965). Because these results led to the question
of whether the selective-exposure phenomenon exists at all, the
present article tries to resolve these contradictory findings on
information search after decision making. In short, we propose that
differences due to available information quantity as well as associated different selection criteria as underlying psychological processes moderate whether decision makers prefer decisionconsistent or decision-inconsistent information.

Individuals often systematically prefer information that is consistent with their beliefs, attitudes, or decisions and, in contrast,
neglect inconsistent information. This phenomenon is called selective exposure to (consistent) information and previous research
has revealed that such biased information-search processes occur
in different contexts, including attitudes (Lundgren & Prislin,
1998), stereotypes (Johnston, 1996; Trope & Thompson, 1997),
expectations (Pinkley, Griffith, & Northcraft, 1995), and selfserving conclusions (Frey, 1981a; Holton & Pyszczynski, 1989).
Most important to the focus of the present article, biased information search has also been consistently observed following individ-

Peter Fischer, School of Psychology, Social, Economic, and Organizational Psychology Unit, University of Exeter, Exeter, England; Stefan
Schulz-Hardt, Institute of Psychology, Economic and Social Psychology
Unit, University of Göttingen, Göttingen, Germany; Dieter Frey, Department of Psychology, Social Psychology Unit, Ludwig-MaximiliansUniversity, Munich, Germany.
Parts of the data from this article were presented in a talk at the
International Congress of Psychology conference in Beijing, August 2004,
as well as in a talk at a conference in Heidelberg, September 2003. The
research reported in this article was made possible by Grants Fr. 472/16-4
and 16-5 from the German Research Foundation (Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft) awarded to Stefan Schulz-Hardt and Dieter Frey.
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Peter
Fischer, Social, Economic, and Organizational Psychology, School of
Psychology, Washington Singer Laboratories, University of Exeter, Exeter
EX4 4OG, UK. E-mail: P.Fischer@exeter.ac.uk

Selective-Exposure Research
A great deal of empirical research on selective exposure to
information has been conducted in the context of dissonance
theory (Festinger, 1957, 1964; Frey, 1986; Jonas et al., 2001; see
also D’Alessio & Allen, 2002). Dissonance theory suggests that
subsequent to having made a decision, decision makers experience
cognitive dissonance because of the salient negative aspects of the
selected alternative and the salient positive aspects of the rejected
alternative. Dissonance is experienced as an aversive affective
231

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

232

FISCHER, SCHULZ-HARDT, AND FREY

state that motivates people to reduce it. One prominent means of
reducing dissonance is selective exposure to consistent information (Festinger, 1957; Frey, 1986).
In the standard research paradigm (see e.g., Frey, 1981a, 1981b,
1981c; Frey, 1986; Jonas et al., 2001), participants are confronted
with a decision problem that requires them to decide between two
different alternatives (e.g., whether the contract of a manager
should be extended or not or whether a company should invest in
Developing Country A or B). They are asked to make a preliminary or final decision and afterward have the opportunity to freely
search for additional decision-consistent and decision-inconsistent
information among a set of equally distributed consistent and
inconsistent pieces of information (e.g., 6 consistent and 6 inconsistent pieces of information; cf. Fischer, Jonas, Frey, & SchulzHardt, 2005; Frey, 1986). Selective exposure to supporting information occurs when participants systematically select more
consistent than inconsistent pieces of decision-relevant information (Frey, 1986; Jonas et al., 2001). So far, various variables have
been identified that increase the tendency to prefer consistent
information after decision making, for example, strong commitment to a position (Frey, 1986; Schwarz, Frey, & Kumpf, 1980),
situations with high freedom of choice (Cotton & Hieser, 1980;
Frey, 1981b; Frey & Wicklund, 1978), when decisions are irreversible (Frey, 1981c), or when individuals are in negative affective states (Jonas, Graupmann, & Frey, 2006).1
In striking contrast to the overall preference for consistent
information found in the above-mentioned studies, as well as in
many others, an influential research program conducted by Freedman (1965) and Sears (1965) consistently found that people systematically prefer information that is inconsistent with their decisions and standpoints. For example, in the Freedman study,
participants listened to an interview with a college student who had
applied for an international conference abroad. The student was
described as either rather competent or incompetent. Participants
then had to decide whether the student’s request should be granted
or not. Subsequently, 2 additional pieces of information were
available: 1 consistent and 1 inconsistent with their prior decision.
Participants were instructed to choose only 1 piece of information.
Contrary to the selective-exposure hypothesis of dissonance theory, a strong preference for inconsistent information was observed:
94% of all participants selected the inconsistent piece of information. Corresponding results were obtained by Sears, who used a
similar information-seeking paradigm in the context of a legal
decision case. Participants had to decide whether a defendant was
guilty or not and subsequently had the chance to select either
decision-consistent or decision-inconsistent information. As in the
Freedman study, a similar strong preference for inconsistent information was observed. As a consequence, the contradictory results
of this research program subsequently led to a significant decrease
in interest in selective-exposure effects. These differences call for
an examination of why this research program by Freedman and
Sears yielded results at odds with those found in corresponding
dissonance research.

The Impact of Information Quantity on Selective
Exposure: The Present Research
We propose that the crucial difference between studies finding
a preference for decision-consistent information and studies find-

ing a preference for decision-inconsistent information is the available quantity of decision-relevant information. In the Freedman
and Sears studies, participants chose between only 2 pieces of
information: 1 consistent and 1 inconsistent with the prior decision
(Freedman, 1965; Freedman & Sears, 1965; Sears, 1965). In
contrast, studies finding a preference for decision-consistent information normally confronted participants with approximately 8 to
16 (half consistent and half inconsistent) pieces of additional
information (e.g., Fischer et al., 2005; Frey, 1981a, 1981b, 1981c;
Jonas et al., 2001; Schulz-Hardt et al., 2000; Schwarz et al., 1980;
for an overview see also Frey, 1986). Thus, it seems that if
decision makers have to choose between 2 pieces of information,
they prefer the inconsistent one. If, however, they are confronted
with larger amounts of information, they exhibit a preference for
consistent information.

Underlying Psychological Processes
We propose that there are three possible psychological processes that could underlie the expected moderating effect of information quantity on selective exposure: (a) differences due to the
amount of aroused dissonance and threat, (b) differences in processing complexity, and (c) different activated selection criteria. In
the following, we outline these different potential psychological
processes.
Dissonance and threat explanation. From the perspective of
dissonance theory, the differential effect of information quantity
on the preference for decision-consistent versus decisioninconsistent information could be explained by (a) different refutation strategies as well as (b) differences in dissonance (threat)
arousal. With regard to (a), refuting inconsistent information is the
most effective way to achieve an enduring and stable reduction in
post-decisional dissonance (cf. Frey, 1986). Hence, when decision
makers are confronted with only 2 (1 consistent and 1 inconsistent)
1
Selective exposure to information should not be mixed up with a
positive test strategy in hypothesis testing (e.g., Devine, Hirt, & Gehrke,
1990; Klayman & Ha, 1987; Slowiaczek, Klayman, Sherman, & Skov,
1992). In research on information search in the context of social hypothesis
testing, participants are asked to test hypotheses about other people, for
example, whether a person is an extrovert or an introvert (Snyder & Swann,
1978). If participants test the hypothesis that a specific person is an
extrovert, they are systematically inclined to ask questions about typical
extrovert rather than introvert behaviors. In contrast, when participants test
the introvert hypothesis, they systematically ask more questions about
introvert rather than extrovert behaviors. To put it differently, individuals
ask questions that, in case of a positive answer, would confirm the hypothesis under consideration. In significant contrast to the present selective
exposure to information paradigm (Festinger, 1957; Frey, 1986; Jonas et
al., 2001), a person asking hypothesis-consistent questions does not know
in advance whether the answer will be consistent or inconsistent to the
hypothesis under consideration. In addition, previous research has revealed
that the employment of a positive test strategy does not depend on a
person’s own opinion: Semin and Strack (1980) have shown that even if
the hypothesis tester is made to believe that the target is an extrovert, the
tester still asks more questions about introvert behaviors because the
experimental task was to test whether the target person is an introvert
(Semin & Strack, 1980). In sum, positive hypothesis testing is a tendency
that is phenomenologically as well as conceptually significantly different
from selective exposure to information (see also Schulz-Hardt et al., 2007).

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

SELECTIVE EXPOSURE AND INFORMATION QUANTITY

pieces of information, the most effective way to bring about a
long-lasting reduction in dissonance is to refute the inconsistent
information. However, if the number of pieces of available inconsistent information increases, selecting and refuting all of the
inconsistent information becomes more and more difficult due to
limited cognitive resources and time constraints. In addition, if
only 1 piece of information can be chosen, selecting and subsequently refuting this 1 piece of inconsistent information would still
leave several remaining inconsistent pieces of information nonrefuted. Consequently, increasing the number of pieces of inconsistent information should result in a stronger preference for consistent information, which (next to refuting all inconsistent pieces of
information) offers the second-best opportunity to reduce dissonance (cf. Frey, 1986). With regard to the differences in dissonance arousal, in the 2-information condition, the potential for
dissonance or threat arousal is comparatively low because only 1
piece of inconsistent or threatening information exists for the
decision maker. In contrast, conditions with more than 1 inconsistent piece of information should lead to a comparatively higher
degree of postdecision dissonance because several inconsistent
pieces of information exist for the decision maker. Hence, because
of higher dissonance and threat arousal in the 10-information
condition, decision makers should be more inclined to select the
consistent piece of information than they would be in the less
dissonance and threat arousing 2-information condition.
Complexity explanation. This explanation assumes that the
preference for consistent information gets stronger with an increasing degree of complexity in the decision task and in the associated
information-seeking process. Increasing quantities of available
decision-relevant information (as is the case in selective-exposure
studies with more than 2 pieces of available information) increase
the complexity of decision tasks. High complexity, in turn, increases the need for closure (cf. Kruglanski & Webster, 1996),
which represents a motivation to reduce decision complexity by
“freezing” a decision alternative as fast as possible. Thereby, an
effective way to reduce cognitive complexity in decision making is
to predominantly search for decision-consistent information,
which helps to bolster one’s own decision. In summary, according
to the complexity explanation, studies with a larger number of
available decision-relevant pieces of information increase decision
complexity, which in turn might trigger decision makers’ need for
closure and thus lead to an increased preference for consistent
information.
Selection-criteria explanation. This explanation is based on
the assumption that different information quantities trigger different selection criteria for information search, which in turn result in
different information preferences. Furthermore, it is assumed that
the use of selection criteria for information search follows the
principle of minimum effort. Correspondingly, people choose
among possible selection criteria the one that best differentiates
between the available pieces of information. If there is more than
one selection criterion that fits this description, decision makers
choose the one that entails the least processing effort. We propose
that two selection criteria are particularly relevant for our experimental situations: (a) information quality and (b) information
direction. With regard to information quality, previous research
has consistently revealed that information search can be strongly
determined by the assessment of expected information quality
(Fischer et al., 2005; Schulz-Hardt, Fischer, & Frey, 2007). That is,

233

on the basis of main arguments (which are the typical basis for
information search), decision makers often try to find the qualitatively best decision-relevant information in their information
search. However, because of a basically more critical testing of
inconsistent information (cf. Ditto & Lopez, 1992; Ditto, Scepansky, Munro, Apanovitch, & Lockhart, 1998) and a systematic
skewing of a priori knowledge toward one’s own standpoints (cf.
Chaiken, Giner-Sorolla, & Chen, 1996; Chaiken, Liberman, &
Eagly, 1989), consistent information normally has a general advantage in the assessment of information quality and thus is
systematically preferred in information search (given information
quality is the salient selection criterion; cf. Fischer et al., 2005;
Schulz-Hardt et al., 2007). With regard to information direction,
other research has revealed that decision makers show balanced
information search (or even a preference for inconsistent information) when they try to be or to appear as unbiased decision makers
and information processors (cf. Kunda, 1990; Pyszczynski &
Greenberg, 1987). Thus, a high salience of information direction
(in contrast to a high salience of information quality) might increase decision makers’ attempts to be and/or appear balanced and
unbiased, which in turn should increase their striving for inconsistent information.
Transferred to our experimental situation with only 2 versus
more than 2 (e.g., 10) pieces of information, these considerations
imply the following: Given 2 available pieces of information (1
decision consistent, 1 decision inconsistent), decision makers do
not need to consider expected information quality (which is effortful to detect) as a selection criterion. Instead they can use the more
easily detectable information direction, which fully distinguishes
between the available pieces of information. If information direction is the salient selection criterion, a preference for inconsistent
information should prevail because the decision maker tries to be
(or at least to seem to be) unbiased, objective, and fair in their
information processing (cf. Kunda, 1990; Pyszczynski & Greenberg, 1987). In contrast, given the situation where more than 2
pieces of information (e.g., 10) are available (half of them supporting and half conflicting with the prior decision), the information direction does not fully distinguish among the available pieces
of information anymore. That is, on the basis of information
direction alone, it is not possible for the decision maker to identify
and select the most relevant piece of information. As a consequence, the decision maker uses the more effortful evaluation of
the expected information quality in order to decide which piece of
information to choose. Hence, because consistent information
mostly appears to be of higher quality than inconsistent information (cf. Fischer et al., 2005; Lord, Ross, & Lepper, 1979), an
increased preference for consistent information should emerge in
conditions with more than 2 pieces of available consistent and
inconsistent information (e.g., in classic conditions with 10 pieces
of information––5 consistent and 5 inconsistent with the participant’s decision or standpoint).
The following studies were designed to test whether different
quantities of decision-relevant information moderate differences
between studies that find a preference for decision-consistent information and studies that find a preference for decisioninconsistent information (Studies 1– 4). Furthermore, we investigated the psychological processes that underlie this expected
effect; we tested whether the expected effect of information quantity on information preferences is due to complexity processes

FISCHER, SCHULZ-HARDT, AND FREY

234

(Study 2), dissonance and threat processes (Study 3), or different
salient selection criteria (Studies 2– 4).

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Study 1
The goal of the first experiment was to test whether the quantity
of available information moderates decision makers’ preference
for consistent versus inconsistent decision-relevant information.
Participants made a decision on a legal case study. Afterward, they
selected 1 piece of information among either 2 or 10 pieces of
information (half consistent and half inconsistent). Participants in
the condition with 2 pieces of information were expected to
systematically prefer inconsistent information and thus replicate
the classic findings of the Freedman (1965) and Sears (1965)
studies (cf. Freedman & Sears, 1965). In contrast, participants in
the condition with 10 pieces of information were expected to
significantly prefer consistent information and thus replicate the
typical findings of recent research on selective exposure (cf. Fischer et al., 2005; Frey, 1986; Jonas et al., 2001).

Method
Participants and design. Sixty-four students (38 women and
26 men, 16 to 32 years of age) from a high school in Kiel and the
Ludwig-Maximilians-University, Munich (both cities located in
Germany) participated in this experiment. It was a one-factorial
design with two experimental conditions (2 pieces of information
vs. 10 pieces of information) for the factor Information Quantity,
with the direction of the selected information (consistent vs. inconsistent) as the dependent variable.
Materials. In order to keep our experimental material as close
as possible to the material used by Sears (1965) and Freedman
(1965), participants were confronted with a legal decision case that
was slightly adapted to the German legal system. The decision case
contained a hearing of evidence concerning the death of Mr.
Schulz, a 19-year-old insurance broker, who lived with his father.
Mr. Schulz’s father was unemployed, which contributed to the
violent climate within the family: Fights between father and son
were common. In a recent fight, Mr. Schulz succumbed to a fatal
knife wound. The father then faced court charged with murder.
However, it was unclear whether the son’s death was murder or
manslaughter. Unfortunately, the only possible eyewitness—Mr.
Schulz’s mother— had been struck on the head during the fight and
was thus unconscious for most of it. Evidence procured from the
scene of the incident was ambiguous.2
After participants had read the legal case study, they finally
decided whether Mr. Schulz was murdered by his father or not.
Afterward, participants were informed that either 2 or 10 pieces of
additional information concerning the court proceeding were available. Each piece of information was characterized by a main thesis
containing information direction (i.e., whether they were consistent or inconsistent with the prior decision) and a short explanation. Participants learned that these main theses represented one
full page of more detailed statements and were appraisals by legal
experts who were familiar with the court proceedings. An example
of a piece of information implying that the father killed Mr. Schulz
is as follows: “Mr. Schulz fought with his father on numerous
occasions. This should be evidence enough of the guilt of the
father.” An example assuming the innocence of the father is as

follows: “We have no fingerprints on the knife and no witnesses.
Without such evidence, Mr. Schulz’s father should be released.” In
both conditions, half of the statements spoke for and half spoke
against a conviction of Mr. Schulz. Hence, irrespective of the
participants’ previous decision, half of the pieces of information
were consistent and half were inconsistent with this decision. The
participants could select only 1 piece of information— either a
consistent or an inconsistent one. Please note that this instruction
to select only 1 piece of information is very important and necessary to keep information-search conditions comparable, otherwise
(under conditions of free choice) information search (i.e., number
of pieces of information that could be selected) and information
quantity (number of pieces of information to which participants are
exposed) would be confounded. After information selection, the
experiment ended and participants were debriefed, thanked for
their participation, and dismissed.

Results and Discussion
Check for interfering effects. Of the 64 participants, 39 decided for a conviction of Mr. Schulz’s father. The information
selection of these participants did not differ from those who
decided against a conviction (␹2 ⬍ 1). Furthermore, neither participants’ age nor participants’ gender significantly influenced the
selectivity of information search or interacted with the experimental factor (all Fs and ␹2s ⬍ 1).
Information search. For an overview of information selection
dependent on the experimental factor, see Figure 1. A chi-square
analysis of the factor Information Number (2 vs. 10 pieces of
information) and the type of information selection (consistent vs.
inconsistent) reached significance, ␹2(1, N ⫽ 64) ⫽ 9.04, p ⫽
.003. Separate analyses revealed that participants in the
2-information condition more often selected an inconsistent
(67.6%) than a consistent (32.4%) piece of information, ␹2(1, N ⫽
34) ⫽ 4.24, p ⫽ .04, replicating the findings of the Freedman
(1965) and Sears (1965) studies. In contrast, participants in the
10-information condition selected significantly more consistent
(70%) than inconsistent (30%) pieces of information, ␹2(1, N ⫽
31) ⫽ 4.80, p ⫽ .03, replicating the typical findings of classic
dissonance studies and recent research on selective exposure.
In showing that the preference for consistent versus inconsistent
information systematically depends on the amount of available
information, Study 1 suggests that information quantity is the
crucial moderator between studies that find a preference for
decision-consistent information and those that find a preference for
decision-inconsistent information. The following studies were designed to replicate this finding with different decision cases and,
most importantly, to identify the differential psychological processes underlying this moderator effect.

Study 2
The aim of the second study was to test whether the findings of
Study 1 were due to different degrees of cognitive complexity in
2
This procedure partially deviates from the classic Sears and Freedman
procedure, which mostly employed one-sided decision cases. However, our
own prestudies revealed that whether the decision case is formulated
one-sided or two-sided (in a balanced manner) does not differently affect
the direction of information search.

SELECTIVE EXPOSURE AND INFORMATION QUANTITY

consistent

proportion of selected articles (%)

100

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

235

inconsistent

90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0

2 pieces of information

Figure 1.

10 pieces of information

Information preference as a function of information quantity (2 vs. 10).

the 2- versus 10-information condition and to employ a decision
scenario that was more involving for student participants (students
had to decide whether or not to introduce tuition fees at German
universities). Processing and testing 10 pieces of information
should be more complex and laborious than processing only 2
pieces of information. From previous research, we know that
conditions that render information processing difficult and laborious—such as time restrictions or noise—increase the preference
for consistent information (cf. Kruglanski & Webster, 1996). This
tendency is explained by the psychological construct “need for
cognitive closure,” which reflects an individual’s need for a strong
and definite answer to a specific question as well as ambiguity
aversion (Kruglanski, 1989; Kruglanski & Webster, 1996). According to this line of argumentation, conditions that enhance
cognitive complexity increase the need for cognitive closure and
thus increase the preference for consistent information. Transferred to the present research, and compared to the 2-information
condition, participants confronted with 10 pieces of decisionrelevant information might have experienced higher cognitive
complexity and therefore an increased need for cognitive closure.
In order to reduce cognitive complexity and reach cognitive closure, they might systematically prefer decision-consistent information. In contrast, participants in the 2-information condition should
have experienced less cognitive complexity, less need for closure,
and therefore a decreased preference for consistent information.
One way to specifically test this complexity explanation is to
design an experimental condition that is almost as low in complexity as the 2-information condition, but (a) does not provide
information direction as a selection criterion that fully distinguishes between the available decision-relevant pieces of information (see Selection-criteria explanation above), and (b) does not
give the information seeker the possibility to refute all inconsistent
information (see Dissonance and threat explanation above). A
condition that possesses these attributes is when participants are
confronted with 4 pieces of information (2 consistent and 2 inconsistent with the preliminary decision). The cognitive complexity of
this condition is quite similar to the low cognitive complexity of
the 2-information condition but simultaneously does not allow
information direction to completely distinguish between the available pieces of information nor does it allow complete dissonance

reduction by refuting all available pieces of inconsistent information (because decision makers can only select 1 piece of information).
In order to test the validity of the complexity explanation,
participants in Study 2 made a preliminary decision and then
selected 1 piece of information among either 2, 4, or 10 decisionrelevant (half consistent and half inconsistent) pieces of information. If the cognitive-complexity explanation is valid, then participants should reveal a more or less similar information-search
pattern both in the 2- and the 4-information condition—namely a
systematic preference for inconsistent information (in other words:
information search patterns in the 4-information condition should
differ from the 10-information condition). If the dissonance or the
selection-criteria explanation is valid, then a preference for consistent information should occur not only in the 10-information
condition but also in the 4-information condition (i.e., no difference should occur between information-search patterns in the 4and 10-information condition). Moreover, in order to get additional information about the participants’ subjective reasons for
their information selection, we asked them in an open-ended
question, after decision making and information selection, about
why they had selected that particular piece of information.

Method
Participants and design. Sixty-nine students (50 women and
19 men; ages ranged from 19 to 40 years; M ⫽ 23.06, SD ⫽ 4.02)
from the Ludwig-Maximilians-University, Munich, Germany, participated in this experiment. The participants were asked to participate in a study on decision making that took place after a social
psychology lecture. The experiment was based on a one-factorial
design (information quantity: 2 vs. 4 vs. 10) with type of selected
information (consistent vs. inconsistent) as the dependent variable.
Materials and procedure. In order to increase the personal
relevance of and involvement in the decision case employed (and
thus to increase the ecological validity of the information-quantity
effect), participants worked on a decision case dealing with the
question of whether or not tuition fees should be introduced at
German universities (a similar version of this decision case was
used by Schulz-Hardt et al., 2007, Exp. 4). Participants were

FISCHER, SCHULZ-HARDT, AND FREY

236

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

proportion of selected articles (%)

100

consistent
inconsistent

90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0

2 pieces of information

Figure 2.

4 pieces of information

10 pieces of information

Information preference as a function of information quantity (2 vs. 10).

informed that the aim of the study was to evaluate and discuss
typical arguments on the question of whether tuition fees should be
introduced in Germany or not. After this short introduction, participants indicated on a checkbox whether they were in favor of or
against the introduction of tuition fees. Please note that participants
were informed that this decision was preliminary and that after
information search (which would help them to optimize their
decision), they would have the chance to revise their decision (at
the end of the experiment). This instruction should have ensured
that participants were convinced that the goal of information
search was to increase the probability of making a correct final
decision. Subsequently, they were informed that after the study,
they would be interviewed on the topic of tuition fees by one of the
experimenters. However, in order to prepare for this short interview, participants could gather 1 (out of 2, 4, or 10) additional
piece of information concerning this decision problem.3
The additional pieces of information were said to consist of
one-page statements written by students from the LudwigMaximilians-University, Munich, Germany. Each statement was
summarized by a main thesis of two sentences. The main thesis
contained the main argument of the corresponding statement and
made it clear whether the author of the statement was in favor of
or against the introduction of tuition fees. Participants were explicitly instructed that they could select only 1 piece of information. An example of a main thesis in favor of the introduction of
fees is as follows: “Tuition fees are a good thing because they
would increase the quality of research and teaching. Thus, German
universities would be more competitive on an international level.”
An example of a main thesis against the introduction of fees is as
follows: “One shouldn’t introduce tuition fees because this would
transform universities into commercial organizations. As a consequence, matters of profitability rather than teaching and research
would be the focus of German universities.” Thus, irrespective of
whether the participants were in favor of or against an introduction
of tuition fees, half of the statements supported their decision and
half conflicted with it. Participants indicated in a checkbox which
pieces of information they wanted to read in full; after information
selection, a final decision was made. Finally, participants were
asked in an open-ended question to write down why they had
selected their specific piece of information. Afterward, they were

informed that the experiment was over and that there was no need
to conduct an interview.

Results and Discussion
Check for interfering effects. Information selection was not
significantly associated with participants’ decision or participants’
gender (all ␹2s ⬍ 1.13).
Information search. For an overview of information selection
dependent on the experimental conditions, see Figure 2. A chisquare analysis of the experimental conditions (2 vs. 4 vs. 10
pieces of information) and information selection (consistent vs.
inconsistent) revealed a significant interaction between both factors, ␹2(2, N ⫽ 69) ⫽ 12.60, p ⫽ .002. Separate analyses revealed
that in the condition with 2 pieces of information, participants
chose the inconsistent information somewhat more often (63%)
than the consistent information (37%), although this preference for
inconsistent information failed to reach significance, ␹2(1, N ⫽
24) ⫽ 1.50, p ⫽ .22. In contrast, both in the 4-information
condition (consistent: 77%; inconsistent: 23%), ␹2(1, N ⫽ 22) ⫽
6.55, p ⫽ .01, and in the 10-information condition (consistent:
83%; inconsistent: 17%), ␹2(1, N ⫽ 23) ⫽ 9.78, p ⫽ .002,
consistent information was chosen significantly more often than
inconsistent information.
In order to test differences in information-search patterns across
the separate experimental conditions, we conducted further analyses. First, we compared the 2-information condition with the
4-information condition and found a significant interaction between information quantity and type of information selected, ␹2(1,
N ⫽ 46) ⫽ 7.39, p ⫽ .01. Moreover, a similar interaction was
observed when comparing the 2-information condition with the
10-information condition, ␹2(1, N ⫽ 47) ⫽ 9.92, p ⫽ .002.
However, no significant interaction between information quantity
3

In order to minimize possible material effects, in the 2-information
condition we used five different information pairs. In the 4-information
condition we used two different 4-information samples. In the following
experiments (Studies 3 and 4), we also varied the pair of employed pieces
of information in the 2-information conditions. They were always five
different subsets of the 10-information condition.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

SELECTIVE EXPOSURE AND INFORMATION QUANTITY

and type of information selected occurred when we compared the
4-information condition with the 10-information condition, ␹2(1,
N ⫽ 45) ⬍ 1, p ⬎ .65. In sum, follow-up analyses suggest that
information-search patterns differ between the 2- versus 4- and
10-information conditions but not between the 4- and 10information conditions.
Reported selection criteria. Participants’ answers on the openended question concerning the subjective reason for their information
selection were coded by two independent raters. The raters decided
whether the answer was quality related (e.g., participants wrote that
they wanted to get the best piece of information or mentioned the
interesting information content as the selection criterion) or direction
related (e.g., participants indicated that they wanted to read a piece of
information that supported or contradicted their own decision). Answers that were neither quality nor direction related were also coded
but, because of their very low frequency, not included in subsequent
analyses. Overall, the raters agreed in 66 of 69 cases, representing an
overlap of more than 95%. Finally, inconsistent rater assessments
were resolved by discussion.
Overall, a significant correlation was found between the type of
information selected (consistent vs. inconsistent) and type of reported selection criterion (direction related vs. quality related;
Spearman’s r ⫽ ⫺.36, p ⫽ .004). That is, when participants
selected a consistent piece of information, they were more inclined
to report a quality-related selection criterion. In contrast, when
participants selected an inconsistent piece of information, they
were more inclined to report a direction-related selection criterion.
Moreover, a chi-square analysis of the experimental conditions (2
vs. 4 vs. 10 pieces of information) and type of reported selection
criterion revealed a significant two-way interaction, ␹2(2, N ⫽
61) ⫽ 6.87, p ⫽ .03. Further analyses, conducted separately for the
three experimental conditions, revealed that participants in the
10-information condition reported more quality-related (71%) than
direction-related (29%) selection criteria for information search,
␹2(1, N ⫽ 21) ⫽ 3.86, p ⫽ .05. The same pattern was found in the
4-information condition (quality-related: 78%; direction-related:
22%), ␹2(1, N ⫽ 18) ⫽ 5.56, p ⫽ .02. In contrast, participants in
the 2-information condition reported somewhat more directionrelated selection criteria (59%) than quality-related selection criteria (41%), although this difference failed to reach significance,
␹2(1, N ⫽ 22) ⫽ 0.73, p ⫽ .39.
In sum, Study 2 revealed a slight, though nonsignificant, preference
for inconsistent information in the 2-information condition (i.e., balanced information search) and a significant preference for consistent
information in the 4-information condition as well as in the 10information condition. It was demonstrated that a significant preference for consistent information emerged as soon as participants were
confronted with more than 2 pieces of information. Because no
different information-search pattern could be observed between the
conditions with 4 and 10 pieces of information, the effect of information quantity on information preference is unlikely to be mediated
by differences due to differences in cognitive complexity. An openended question provided initial support for the validity of the proposed selection-criteria explanation.

Study 3
In the next study, we succeeded in collecting more direct evidence for our main assumption that the differential information

237

search in the 2- versus 10-information condition is based on
different salient selection criteria, and, in addition, we tested
whether the 2- versus 10-information effect could also alternatively be due to dissonance processes. From the perspective of
dissonance theory, the effect of information quantity on the preference for consistent versus inconsistent information could emerge
as follows: When people are confronted with only 1 inconsistent
and 1 consistent piece of information, then (a) the potential for
dissonance arousal and threat is comparatively low because only 1
piece of inconsistent information exists for the decision maker
(Frey, 1986), and (b) refuting that 1 piece of inconsistent information is the most efficient way to reach long-lasting dissonance
reduction (cf. Festinger, 1964; Frey, 1986). If the only existing
piece of inconsistent information can be refuted, no further sources
of potential dissonance arousal remain. In contrast, conditions with
more than 1 inconsistent piece of information should lead to (a) a
comparatively higher degree of postdecisional dissonance because
several inconsistent pieces of information exist and (b) a refutation
strategy that is an ineffective way of achieving dissonance reduction because even if 1 inconsistent piece of information were
refuted, several pieces of nonrefuted inconsistent information
would still remain (because in our classic paradigm, decision
makers can only choose 1 piece of additional information). As a
consequence, selecting a consistent piece of information should be
the most efficient way to achieve dissonance reduction in conditions with more than 1 consistent and 1 inconsistent piece of
information.
Instead of the dissonance explanation, we propose an alternative
explanation that is based on different selection criteria. This alternative explanation is derived from the hypothesis that information
search follows the minimum-effort principle and, therefore, decision makers try to select the piece of information that best differentiates among all available pieces of information. If there is more
than one selection criterion that fits this description, decision
makers choose the one that requires the least processing effort. In
the 2-information condition, information direction completely distinguishes between both available pieces of information and requires less cognitive effort than assessing the information quality
of the pieces of information individually. Therefore, decision
makers’ information search should be guided by information direction, which, however, triggers individuals’ desire to be and/or
appear self-critical and unbiased (Kunda, 1990; Pyszczynski &
Greenberg, 1987) and thus leads to a systematic preference for
inconsistent information. However, given that more than 1 consistent and 1 inconsistent piece of decision-relevant information exist,
information direction no longer completely differentiates the available pieces of information. Hence, decision makers should switch
to the cognitively more demanding assessment of information
quality as the crucial selection criterion. However, because previous research has shown that consistent information is generally
assessed to be of higher quality than inconsistent information
(Ditto & Lopez, 1992; Ditto et al., 1998; Fischer et al., 2005;
Schulz-Hardt et al., 2007), in conditions with more than 2 available
pieces of information, individuals are expected to systematically
prefer a consistent piece of information.
The following research design, which varies as to whether in the
2- versus 10-information condition information content is given or
not, helps to empirically distinguish between both the dissonance
explanation and the selection-criteria explanation: If the 2- versus

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

238

FISCHER, SCHULZ-HARDT, AND FREY

10-information effect is due to different selection criteria, and
therefore partially based on biased assessment of information
quality in the condition with 10 pieces of information, then removing information content as a possible selection criterion––
which means that evaluation of information quality is no longer
possible––should reduce the preference for consistent information
in that condition. However, if the 2- versus 10-information effect
is due to dissonance processes, it should make no difference
whether participants are provided with both information direction
and detailed information content or with information direction
only (without information content), because dissonance arousal is
mostly a function of information direction (i.e., whether the information is consistent or inconsistent with one’s own standpoint). In
short, the manipulation of information content should have no
impact on the 2- versus 10-information effect if it is due to
dissonance processes. In contrast, it should eliminate the preference for consistent information in the 10-information condition, as
that effect is partially based on the biased assessment of information quality (i.e., different selection criteria).

Method
Participants and design. One hundred and nine (81 women
and 28 men, ages ranged from 18 to 55 years; M ⫽ 26.07, SD ⫽
6.74) undergraduate and graduate students from LudwigMaximilians-University, Munich, Germany, participated in this
experiment. All participants were recruited in the university cafeteria by asking whether they would be willing to participate in a
study on decision making at the nearby Department of Psychology.
The experiment was based on a 2 (information quantity: 2 vs.
10) ⫻ 2 (information content: given vs. not given) factorial
between-subject design. Participants were randomly assigned to
one of four experimental conditions.
Procedure. In Study 3, we employed a personnel decision case
that has also been used in previous experiments on selective
exposure (cf. Fischer et al., 2005). The participants were asked to
imagine themselves in the role of a fashion store owner and to
decide whether the contract of a manager (Mr. Miller) should be
extended or not. They received a questionnaire containing an
introduction to the topic and the most important facts about Mr.
Miller’s work: Mr. Miller had been hired to manage a fashion store
1 year ago. Mr. Miller’s contract had been limited to a 1-year term;
after that year, negotiations were to be conducted to discuss a
possible extension of the contract. The participants were told that
the success of Mr. Miller’s work was mixed. For example, he had
succeeded in gaining new customers for the store by introducing a
new product line (“Young Fashion”). However, at the same time,
some of the store’s regular customers had been lost because they
did not accept Mr. Miller’s “Men’s Fashion” collection. Positive
and negative aspects of Mr. Miller’s work were balanced overall.
After participants had read these facts, they were asked to make a
preliminary decision as to whether Mr. Miller’s contract should be
extended or not (participants were also informed that following
their information search, they would have the opportunity to revise
their decision at the end of the experiment).
Afterward, participants were informed that additional information concerning the decision problem was available (which would
help them to make their final decision). The additional pieces of
information consisted of either 2 or 10 one-page statements written

by Mr. Miller’s colleagues. Each statement was summarized by a
main thesis of two sentences. The main thesis contained the main
argument of the corresponding statement and made it obvious
whether the expert was in favor of or against an extension of the
contract. Irrespective of whether the participants were in favor of
or against an extension of the contract, half of the statements
(either 1 or 5) supported their decision and the other half conflicted
with it. Accordingly, the experimental manipulation of information
quantity took place according to the number of statements presented (2 vs. 10).
Moreover, the factor Information Content was manipulated as
follows: The short description of the available pieces of information contained either both the information direction and the corresponding main argument (information content given) or only the
information direction without any explanation (information content not given). An example of a piece of information with information content provided is as follows: “Mr. Miller has made the
best out of the current difficult economic situation. Therefore, his
contract should be extended.” An example of a piece of information with no information content provided is as follows: “Mr.
Miller’s contract should not be extended.” In the first case, participants could use two different selection criteria, namely information quality (inferred from the argument “Mr. Miller has made
the best of the currently difficult economic situation”) and information direction (apparent in the statement “Mr. Miller’s contract
should be extended”). In the latter case, information direction
(“Mr. Miller’s contract should not be extended”) was the only
possible selection criterion. After information selection, participants made a final decision on whether the contract of the manager
should be extended or not. After the experiment was over, all
participants were debriefed, informed why it was not necessary to
read the selected pieces of information, and given a cup of coffee
and a chocolate bar as a token of our thanks for their participation.

Results and Discussion
Of the 109 participants, 4 had to be excluded from further
analyses. Two of them failed to fill in the questionnaire completely
and a further 2 had suspicions regarding the aim of the study. Thus
the sample size for analysis was 105. Information selection was not
significantly associated with participants’ decision or participants’
gender (all ␹2s ⬍ 1).
For an overview concerning information search as a function of
the experimental conditions, see Figure 3. A 2 ⫻ 2 ⫻ 2-factorial
log linear analysis revealed a significant three-way interaction
among the factors Information Quantity (2 vs. 10), Information
Content (given vs. not given), and Information Selection (consistent vs. inconsistent), Z ⫽ ⫺2.31, confidence interval (⫺3.80,
⫺0.31), SE ⫽ 0.89, p ⫽ .02. Two chi-square analyses, conducted
separately for conditions with and without information content,
revealed a significant interaction between the factors Information
Quantity and Information Selection for only the condition with
information content provided, ␹2(1, N ⫽ 55) ⫽ 16.78, p ⬍ .001;
participants in the 2-information condition selected the inconsistent piece of information significantly more often (68%) than they
did the consistent piece (32%), ␹2(1, N ⫽ 31) ⫽ 3.90, p ⫽ .048,
whereas participants in the 10-information condition selected a
consistent piece of information significantly more often (88%)
than they did an inconsistent one (12%), ␹2(1, N ⫽ 24) ⫽ 13.50,

SELECTIVE EXPOSURE AND INFORMATION QUANTITY

239

proportion of selected articles (%)

100

consistent

90

inconsistent

80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

0
2 info./content

10 info./content

2 info./no content

10 info./no
content

Figure 3. Information preference as a function of information quantity (2 vs. 10) and information content
(content vs. no content). Info. ⫽ information.

p ⬍ .001. This replicates the classic information-quantity effect
from Studies 1 and 2. In contrast, in the conditions where information content was not provided, no significant interaction occurred between the factors Information Quantity and Information
Selection, ␹2(1, N ⫽ 50) ⫽ 0.74, p ⫽ .39. In both the
2-information condition (consistent: 36%; inconsistent: 64%),
␹2(1, N ⫽ 25) ⫽ 1.96, p ⫽ .16, and the 10-information condition
(consistent: 48%; inconsistent: 52%), ␹2(1, N ⫽ 25) ⫽ 0.04, p ⫽
.84, inconsistent pieces of information were selected slightly, but
nonsignificantly, more frequently.
Two additional chi-square analyses, conducted separately for
conditions with 2 and 10 pieces of information, revealed a significant interaction between the factors Information Content and
Information Selection for only the 10-information condition, ␹2(1,
N ⫽ 49) ⫽ 8.69, p ⬍ .01, indicating that participants in the
10-information condition with information content provided selected significantly more consistent (88%) than inconsistent pieces
of information (12%), ␹2(1, N ⫽ 24) ⫽ 13.50, p ⬍ .001. In
contrast, participants in the 10-information condition with no information content provided did not select significantly more consistent (48%) than inconsistent pieces of information (52%), ␹2(1,
N ⫽ 25) ⫽ 0.04, p ⬎ .84. Moreover, for the 2-information
condition, no significant interaction occurred between the factors
Information Content and Information Selection, ␹2(1, N ⫽ 56) ⫽
0.09, p ⬎ .76. In both the 2-information condition with information content given (consistent: 32%; inconsistent: 68%), ␹2(1, N ⫽
31) ⫽ 3.90, p ⫽ .048, and with no information content given
(consistent: 36%; inconsistent: 64%), ␹2(1, N ⫽ 25) ⫽ 1.96, p ⫽
.16, participants selected more inconsistent than consistent pieces
of information (please note that this tendency was significant for
the information content given condition but not significant for the
information content not given condition).
In summary, Study 3 revealed that the 2- versus 10-information
effect is not likely to be due to dissonance or threat-related processes because it was differentially affected by the informationcontent manipulation. That is, given that information content and
information direction were both presented, the basic 2- versus
10-information effect of the previous two experiments was replicated. However, if the main argument was missing (no information

content), differences in information selection disappeared and a
slightly (though not significantly) increased selection rate of inconsistent pieces of information was observed for both the
2-information and 10-information conditions. Hence, Study 3 provides further evidence that quality aspects are a crucial selection
criterion in the 10-information condition, which thus supports the
idea of our selection-criteria explanation.

Study 4
Finally, we conducted a fourth study that directly tested the
validity of the selection-criteria explanation by manipulating both
the salience of information direction and information quality as a
selection criterion in the 2- and 10-information conditions. If
conditions with 2 versus more than 2 (e.g., 4 or 10) pieces of
information trigger different selection criteria and thus account for
different information preferences in the 2- versus 10-information
conditions, then the direct experimental manipulation of these two
selection criteria (information direction vs. information quality)
should directly affect information search, whereas the effect of
information quantity on information preference should be simultaneously eliminated. This experimental logic is analogous to the
logic of mediational analysis (Baron & Kenny, 1986). The mediator variable (i.e., different salient selection criteria) should be
connected to the dependent variable (i.e., information preference).
That is, a direct manipulation of the mediator variable should lead
to the same effect in the dependent variable as a manipulation of
the independent variable (i.e., information quantity). In addition, if
the effect of the mediator variable is statistically controlled for, the
effect of the independent variable (information quantity) on the
dependent variable (information preference) should be eliminated.
In order to provide such a test, we conducted the following
experiment. As in Study 3, participants made a personnel decision
about the future career of Mr. Miller and subsequently selected 1
out of either 2 or 10 pieces of information, half supporting and half
conflicting with their prior decision. In addition, participants were
instructed to base their information selection on either information
direction (direction focus) or information quality (quality focus). A
control group received no additional instructions. If an increased

FISCHER, SCHULZ-HARDT, AND FREY

240

consistent

100

inconsistent

proportion of selected articles (%)

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
2 inf./no focus

10 inf./no focus

2 inf./quality
focus

10 inf./ quality
focus

2 inf./direction 10 inf./direction
focus
focus

Figure 4. Information preference as a function of information quantity (2 vs. 10) and induced selection
criterion (no focus vs. quality focus vs. direction focus). Inf. ⫽ information.

salience of information direction is associated with an increased
desire to appear unbiased and therefore causes a systematic preference for inconsistent information, then the direction focus should
lead to a preference for inconsistent information in both the 2- and
10-information conditions. In contrast, given the quality focus, a
systematic preference for consistent information was expected for
the 2- as well as the 10-information condition due to the general
expected quality advantage of consistent information.

Method
Participants and design. One hundred and fifty five (112
women and 43 men, ages ranged from 19 to 49 years; M ⫽ 25.25,
SD ⫽ 5.28) students from Ludwig-Maximilians-University, Munich, Germany, participated in this experiment. All participants
were recruited on the university campus by asking whether they
would be willing to participate in a study on decision making at the
nearby Department of Psychology. The experiment was based on
a 2 (information quantity: 2 vs. 10) ⫻ 3 (induced selection criterion: quality focus vs. direction focus vs. no focus induction)
between-subjects design. Participants were randomly assigned to
one of six experimental conditions.
Procedure. As in Study 3, the Miller case was used. After the
introduction and preliminary decision on whether the contract of
the manager, Mr. Miller, should be extended or not (participants
were informed that following their information search they could
revise their preliminary decision), participants selected from 2 or
10 pieces of information that provided additional consistent and
inconsistent information concerning their prior decision. However,
in order to manipulate quality or direction salience, we had them
read different instructions prior to information selection. The instruction for the quality focus was as follows: “Very important:
please compare the available pieces of information with regard to
their quality and select the one that is the best in your opinion, that
is, the one which you consider to be most important, most credible,
and most cogent. You can only select one of the available pieces
of information.” Correspondingly, the instruction for the direction

focus was as follows: “Very important: half of the following
articles are in favor of an extension and half of them are against an
extension of Mr. Miller’s contract. Please bear this in mind as you
select a piece of information; you should just consider whether you
would like to read a piece of information that supports your prior
decision or one that contradicts it. You can only select one of the
available pieces of information.”4 Participants in the control condition received no extra focus instruction, the only instruction to
them was “You can only select one of the available pieces of
information.” Following information selection, participants made a
final decision, which marked the end of the experiment. All
participants were debriefed, informed why it was not necessary to
read the selected pieces of information, and given a cup of coffee
and a chocolate bar as a token of our thanks for participation.

Results and Discussion
Information selection was not significantly associated with participants’ decision or participants’ gender (all ␹2s ⬍ 1).
For an overview of information search dependent on the experimental conditions, see Figure 4. A 2 ⫻ 3 ⫻ 2-factorial log linear
analysis revealed a significant three-way interaction between Information Quantity, Induced Selection Criterion, and Information
Selection, Z ⫽ ⫺2.02, confidence interval (⫺3.54, ⫺0.05), SE ⫽

4

Please note that none of these instructions contains a specific demand
cue instigating participants to prefer either consistent or inconsistent information. A person who is asked to base their information selection on the
direction of the information is still free to choose information that is either
consistent or inconsistent with their prior choice. Similarly, if a person is
asked to choose the information with the highest expected quality, this
instruction says nothing about whether the best information supports or
conflicts with the decision maker’s prior choice.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

SELECTIVE EXPOSURE AND INFORMATION QUANTITY

0.89, p ⫽ .04.5 Separate 2 ⫻ 2 analyses for the three different foci
(quality, direction, no induction) clarified this interaction. Given
no induction, the analysis revealed a significant interaction between the factors Information Quantity and Information Selection,
␹2(1, N ⫽ 52) ⫽ 13.18, p ⫽ .001, indicating that participants in the
2-information condition selected more inconsistent (69%) than
consistent pieces of information (31%), ␹2(1, N ⫽ 26) ⫽ 3.85, p ⫽
.05, whereas participants in the 10-information condition selected
significantly more consistent (81%) than inconsistent pieces of
information (19%), ␹2(1, N ⫽ 26) ⫽ 9.85, p ⫽ .003. This replicates the basic effect of information quantity on information preference that has also been shown in the previous three experiments.
As predicted, this basic pattern was weakened or eliminated
when a specific selection criterion was induced. Given the quality
focus, participants in both the 2-information (71% consistentinformation selections) and the 10-information condition (78%
consistent-information selections) selected significantly more consistent than inconsistent pieces of information, ␹2(1, N ⫽ 24) ⫽
4.17, p ⫽ .04, and ␹2(1, N ⫽ 27) ⫽ 8.33, p ⫽ .01, for the 2- and
10-information conditions, respectively. No significant interaction
emerged, ␹2(1, N ⫽ 51) ⫽ 0.32, p ⫽ .57. Given the direction
focus, participants in both the 2-information condition (92%
inconsistent-information selections) and the 10-information condition (59% inconsistent-information selections) selected more
inconsistent than consistent pieces of information, as predicted.
However, since this tendency was stronger and significant in the
2-information condition, ␹2(1, N ⫽ 25) ⫽ 17.64, p ⫽ .001, and
weaker and nonsignificant in the 10-information condition, ␹2(1,
N ⫽ 27) ⫽ 0.93, p ⫽ .33, an unpredicted significant interaction
emerged in the direction-focus conditions, ␹2(1, N ⫽ 52) ⫽ 7.42,
p ⫽ .01.
The results of Study 4 support the idea that the contrasting
information preferences in conditions with 2 versus more than 2
(e.g., 10) pieces of decision-relevant information are due to different selection criteria. Basically, the 2- versus 10-information
effect was replicated again. However, if participants were reminded about information quality in both the 2- and 10information conditions, they selected significantly more decisionconsistent than decision-inconsistent pieces of information. In
contrast, when participants were reminded about information direction, in the 2-information condition, they systematically selected more inconsistent than consistent information, and in the
10-information condition, they selected slightly (but not significantly) more inconsistent than consistent pieces of information.
Please note that the normally strong preference for consistent
information in the 10-information condition vanished when an
information direction cue was given. In sum, if the salient selection
criterion was manipulated and thereby held constant, the
2-information versus 10-information effect disappeared. Therefore, the results clearly support our selection-criteria explanation.

General Discussion
The proposition that people systematically prefer information
that supports their decisions, attitudes, and opinions is broadly
accepted in social psychological research (Brannon, Tagler, &
Eagly, 2007; Festinger, 1957; Fischer et al., 2005; Frey, 1986;
Jonas et al., 2001; Lundgren & Prislin, 1998). However, some
influential studies have revealed a systematic preference for in-

241

consistent information (Freedman, 1965; Freedman & Sears, 1965;
Sears, 1965). To date, it has not been clear why these different
studies yielded contradictory results. A series of four experiments
ascertained that the crucial difference between studies that found a
systematic preference for consistent information and those that
found a systematic preference for inconsistent information was the
available quantity of selectable information. When people were
confronted with 2 pieces of information (1 consistent, 1 inconsistent) they predominantly selected the inconsistent information. Yet
when confronted with more than 2 pieces of information, they
systematically selected the consistent information more often than
the inconsistent information (Studies 1 and 2). We excluded complexity differences (Study 2) and dissonance and threat processes
(Study 3) as possible psychological mediators. Furthermore, we
found clear empirical support for a selection-criteria explanation of
the information-quantity effect (Studies 2– 4): Information search
basically follows the minimum-effort principle and, therefore,
decision makers try to choose the selection criterion that best
differentiates between all the available pieces of information.
If there are several selection criteria that fit this description, then
decision makers choose the criterion that requires the least cognitive processing effort. In the 2-information condition, information
direction completely distinguishes between both available pieces
of information and requires less cognitive effort than assessing
expected information quality. Therefore, decision makers’ information search is guided by information direction, and, thus, they
select the inconsistent piece, which helps them to be or to appear
self-critical (cf. Kunda, 1990; Pyszczynski & Greenberg, 1987).
However, given more than 1 consistent and 1 inconsistent piece of
information, information direction no longer completely differentiates between all available pieces of information. Therefore, decision makers switch to the cognitively more demanding assessment of information quality as the crucial selection criterion,
which, however, because of a general subjective quality advantage
of consistent over inconsistent information, causes a systematic
preference for consistent information (Fischer et al., 2005; SchulzHardt et al., 2007). Our studies clearly support this selectioncriteria-based account for the effect of information quantity on
selective exposure.

Implications
The present results have several theoretical and practical implications. First of all, they resolve a long-lasting debate about the
question of whether people predominantly prefer consistent to
inconsistent information. Research from Freedman and Sears
(Freedman, 1965; Freedman & Sears, 1965; Sears, 1965) suggested that, above all, people prefer inconsistent information,
which subsequently led to a substantial reduction in the number of
studies on selective exposure. Although more recent research has
shown that this termination was not justified and that selective
exposure to consistent information is indeed an existing psychological phenomenon (Frey, 1986; Jonas et al., 2001; Schulz-Hardt
5

The second order three-way interaction in the logit analysis (which
occurred because information focus is a factor with three steps) did not
reach significance, Z ⫽ ⫺1.55, confidence interval (⫺3.47, 0.41), SE ⫽
0.99, p ⫽ .12.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

242

FISCHER, SCHULZ-HARDT, AND FREY

et al., 2000), to date it has been unclear why Freedman (1965) and
Sears (1965) found a strong preference for inconsistent information. The present studies resolve these contradictory results by
demonstrating that the opposing-information preference is due to
the different quantities of information available in the Sears and
Freedman studies (2 pieces of information) compared to recent
studies on selective exposure (more than 2 pieces of information).
Moreover, the present research broadened the scope of the
evaluation-based explanation of selective exposure (Schulz-Hardt
et al., 2007): We found that subjective information quality drives
information search only under conditions in which information
quality indeed is the salient selection criterion in peoples’ minds.
In contrast, when information direction is highly salient, decision
makers increasingly prefer inconsistent information in their information search. Together these results show how important the
consideration of specific context factors (such as different information quantities) and their triggering of different selection criteria
can be for the prediction of the direction of information search (see
also Fischer et al., 2005).
Another important theoretical implication of the present results
is that they induce doubt about the classic dissonance theoretical
explanation of selective exposure. In situations in which information direction was the crucial selection criterion (these are situations in which dissonance and dissonance-reduction processes
could work in their pure forms), participants did not prefer the
consistent information, and even revealed a strong preference for
the inconsistent information. In short, under conditions of high
salience of information direction, participants wanted to be or at
least to appear to be self-critical information searchers, which is a
pattern that does not easily fit the classical dissonance explanation.
On a practical level, the present results have important implications for decreasing selective exposure to consistent information,
which has often been shown to decrease decision quality and thus
increase the probability of bad decision outcomes (Janis, 1982;
Kray & Galinsky, 2003). The present research revealed that a
preference for inconsistent information could be induced by not
only reducing the number of pieces of information to 1 piece that
conflicts with and 1 piece that supports a prior decision (which is
seldom the case in real-life decision making) but also by increasing
the salience of information direction with an explicit instruction to
base information selection on information direction. This could be
a promising new debiasing technique as long as it can be demonstrated that this debiasing effect also exists when decision makers
are allowed to freely select among the available pieces of information and are not restricted to selecting only 1 piece of information.
Tasks with different quantities of decision-relevant information
available after preliminary decisions reflect real-life situations and
are thus of considerable practical relevance for decision makers.
For example, information quantity and associated information
selection can be restricted (a) when decision makers are under
considerable time pressure (so that they can gather only a very
small amount of the existing information), (b) when they have
limited cognitive resources (e.g., when multitasking or in high
stress situations), (c) when additional information is very expensive (e.g., when the amount of money or effort one has to invest for
gathering additional information is extremely high), or (d) when a
specific event occurs very seldom. The following example could
illustrate this: If a physician preliminarily diagnoses a very rare

disease (e.g., Menkes disease––a hereditary copper-based metabolic disorder), she or he has little additional decision-relevant
information available (e.g., personal experience with this disease,
experiences of colleagues, scientific publications) to make the final
diagnosis compared to when a very frequently occurring disease
(e.g., asthma) is at stake. Moreover, in the context of this example,
not only information quantity but also the amount of selectable
information can be restricted. That is, if a general practitioner has
a preliminary suspicion that a patient suffers from a specific
disease, she or he will transfer the patient to a specialist to clarify
the diagnosis. Normally, because of time and money restrictions,
general practitioners do not transfer patients to several specialists
but to only one. For some diseases, many specialists are available
(e.g., orthopedic problems), whereas for other diseases there are
very few specialists available (e.g., rare hereditary disorders). The
general practitioner has to decide to which one of the many
available orthopedists (akin to our 10-information condition) versus to which one of the few hereditary disorder specialists (akin to
our 2-information condition) she or he will send the patient. In
addition, the general practitioner has an idea whether the specialist
normally supports her or his preliminary diagnoses or not and why
(which reflects our experimental information-search paradigm
when participants know whether the selected information will be
consistent or inconsistent to their preliminary decision). Due to our
findings, the general practitioner is expected to send the patient
with orthopedic problems to the orthopedist who normally supports her preliminary diagnoses (comparable to the 10-information
condition), whereas, in contrast, the general practitioner is expected to send the patient with the supposed rare hereditary disorder to a specialist who is expected to be more critical with the
general practitioner’s preliminary diagnosis (comparable to the
2-information condition). In sum, these examples illustrate that the
experimental paradigm employed in the present research has important implications for real-life decision making and information
search.

Limitations and Directions for Future Research
Some limitations of the current findings have to be taken into
account. First, in contrast to Studies 1, 3, and 4, we did not find a
significant preference for inconsistent over consistent information
in the 2-information condition of Study 2. Although participants
selected somewhat more inconsistent than consistent information
in that condition, this tendency failed to reach significance. One
possible reason for this somewhat unexpected finding could be that
the decision case employed was more involving than the other
decision cases. Student participants had to decide whether they
were in favor of tuition fees or not. Since this topic is highly
relevant for students, additional motivational (defense related)
factors could have been at work. As a consequence, increased
defensive tendencies might have led to a more frequent selection
of consistent information in the 2-information condition of Study
2 compared to the 2-information conditions of the remaining three
studies (which employed less involving decision scenarios). However, at the same time, it is also possible that some random
variation reduced the effect to a level below statistical significance.
As the preference for inconsistent information given 2 available
pieces of information was significant in three out of four studies,
and because in the second study the means were also in that

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

SELECTIVE EXPOSURE AND INFORMATION QUANTITY

direction, we generally consider the differential effect of information quantity on information preference to be a rather robust one.
Second, inducing a direction focus in the 10-information condition— either by removing information content or instructing
participants to attend to the information direction (Studies 3 and
4)— did not cause a clear, significant preference for inconsistent
information (although the typical preference for consistent information in that condition was no longer significant). Therefore,
either the manipulation of the direction focus was not strong
enough or an additional, unknown variable affected information
preference, especially in the 10-information condition. Future research should address this point and attempt to determine whether
the manipulation was too weak on the one hand or to identify the
missing determinants of information preference on the other hand.
Third, in order to prevent demand effects, we did not measure
participants’ motivation to be or to appear to be an unbiased
decision maker (illusion of objectivity; Kunda, 1990; Pyszczynski
& Greenberg, 1987), which was postulated to be associated with
the increased selection rate of inconsistent information in the
2-information condition. Future research should try to measure
peoples’ intention to appear unbiased without possible demand and
test whether that motive mediates the effect of information direction on information preference.
Fourth, besides quality and information direction, there might be
other possible selection criteria for information search, such as
uncertainty reduction. In the context of stereotype-related information search, Trope and colleagues (e.g., Cameron & Trope,
2004; Trope & Liberman, 1996; Trope & Thompson, 1997) documented that information search can be systematically affected by
the desire to reduce uncertainty about attributes held by another
person, which in turn can lead to the employment of asymmetric
information search and biased strategies of questioning. Uncertainty reduction might have played a significant role in our studies
as well. For example, when participants were exposed to 10 pieces
of information, uncertainty about the validity of one’s own standpoint might have been stronger than when they were confronted
with only 2 pieces of information. Although the results of Studies
3 and 4 revealed that the two selection criteria (information quality
and information direction) directly change the way individuals
search for new information, future research should address
whether uncertainty-reduction processes might have additionally
interacted with the selection criteria we suggest in the present
research.
Fifth and finally, a limitation of the present research is that it
does not directly address the extent to which the exposure to pieces
of information with more or less decision-inconsistent content
represents a threat to a decision maker’s prior decision. For example, in the 10-information condition, participants were informed
that there exist at least five facts that speak against their initial
decision. Such knowledge might imply a threat to this decision and
thus might lead decision makers to spontaneously bolster their
standpoint (i.e., selection of decision-consistent information). In
contrast, in the 2-information condition, the threat implied by a
single piece of decision-inconsistent information seems to be minimal, which allows decision makers to satisfy their need for knowledge and examine the argument that contradicts their prior decision.6 Although this threat-based explanation is very similar to the
dissonance explanation of the effect (which was ruled out in Study
3), future research should nevertheless more directly address this

243

alternative explanation by measuring to what extent decision makers differentially feel threatened by inconsistent information in the
2- versus 10-information condition.

6

We want to thank an anonymous reviewer for this important point.

References
Baron, R., & Kenny, D. (1986). The moderator–mediator variable distinction in social psychological research: Conceptual, strategic, and statistical considerations. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 51,
1173–1182.
Brannon, L. A., Tagler, M. J., & Eagly, A. H. (2007). The moderating role
of attitude strength in selective exposure to information. Journal of
Experimental Social Psychology, 43, 611– 617.
Cameron, J. A., & Trope, Y. (2004). Stereotype-biased search and processing of information about group members. Social Cognition, 22,
650 – 672.
Chaiken, S., Giner-Sorolla, R., & Chen, S. (1996). Beyond accuracy:
Defense and impression motives in heuristic and systematic information
processing. In P. M. Gollwitzer & J. A. Bargh (Eds.), The psychology of
action: Linking cognition and motivation to behavior (pp. 553–578).
New York: Guilford.
Chaiken, S., Liberman, A., & Eagly, A. H. (1989). Heuristic and systematic
information processing within and beyond the persuasion context. In
J. S. Uhleman & J. A. Bargh (Eds.), Unintended thought (pp. 212–252).
New York: Guilford.
Cotton, J. L., & Hieser, R. A. (1980). Selective exposure to information
and cognitive dissonance. Journal of Research in Personality, 14, 518 –
527.
D’Alessio, D., & Allen, M. (2002). Selective exposure and dissonance after
decisions. Psychological Reports, 91, 527–532.
Devine, P. G., Hirt, E. R., Gehrke, E. M. (1990). Diagnostic and confirmation strategies in trait hypothesis testing. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 58, 952–963.
Ditto, P. H., & Lopez, D. F. (1992). Motivated skepticism: Use of differential decision criteria for preferred and nonpreferred conclusions. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 63, 568 –584.
Ditto, P. H., Scepansky, J. A., Munro, G. D., Apanovitch, A. M., &
Lockhart, L. K. (1998). Motivated sensitivity to preference-inconsistent
information. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 75, 53– 69.
Festinger, L. (1957). A theory of cognitive dissonance. Stanford, CA:
Stanford University Press.
Festinger, L. (1964). Conflict, decision, and dissonance. Stanford, CA:
Stanford University Press.
Fischer, P., Jonas, E., Frey, D., & Schulz-Hardt, S. (2005). Selective
exposure to information: The impact of information limits. European
Journal of Social Psychology, 35, 469 – 492.
Freedman, J. L. (1965). Preference for dissonant information. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 2, 287–289.
Freedman, J. L., & Sears, D. O. (1965). Selective exposure. In L. Berkowitz (Ed.), Advances in experimental social psychology (Vol. 2, pp.
57–97). New York: Academic Press.
Frey, D. (1981a). The effect of negative feedback about oneself and cost of
information on preferences for information about the source of this
feedback. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 17, 42–50.
Frey, D. (1981b). Postdecisional preference for decision-relevant information as a function of the competence of its source and the degree of
familiarity with this information. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 17, 51– 67.
Frey, D. (1981c). Reversible and irreversible decisions: Preference for
consonant information as a function of attractiveness of decision alternatives. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 7, 621– 626.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

244

FISCHER, SCHULZ-HARDT, AND FREY

Frey, D. (1986). Recent research on selective exposure to information. In
L. Berkowitz (Ed.), Advances in experimental social psychology (Vol.
19, pp. 41– 80). New York: Academic Press.
Frey, D., & Wicklund, R. A. (1978). A clarification of selective exposure:
The impact of choice. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 14,
132–139.
Holton, B., & Pyszczynski, T. (1989). Biased information search in the
interpersonal domain. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 15,
42–51.
Janis, I. L. (1982). Groupthink (Rev. ed.). Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
Johnston, L. (1996). Resisting change: Information-seeking and stereotype
change. European Journal of Social Psychology, 26, 799 – 825.
Jonas, E., Graupmann, V., & Frey, D. (2006). The influence of mood on the
search for supporting versus conflicting information: Dissonance reduction as a means of mood regulation? Personality and Social Psychology
Bulletin, 32, 3–15.
Jonas, E., Greenberg, J., & Frey, D. (2003). Connecting terror management
and dissonance theory: Evidence that mortality salience increases the
preference for consistent information after decisions. Personality and
Social Psychology Bulletin, 29, 1181–1189.
Jonas, E., Schulz-Hardt, S., Frey, D., & Thelen, N. (2001). Confirmation
bias in sequential information search after preliminary decisions: An
expansion of dissonance theoretical research on selective exposure to
information. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 80, 557–
571.
Klayman, J., & Ha, Y.-W. (1987). Confirmation, disconfirmation, and
information in hypothesis testing. Psychological Review, 94, 211–228.
Kray, L. J., & Galinsky, A. D. (2003). The debiasing effect of counterfactual mind-sets: Increasing the search for disconfirmatory information in
group decisions. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 91, 69 – 81.
Kruglanski, A. W. (1989). Lay epistemics and human knowledge. New
York: Plenum Press.
Kruglanski, A. W., & Webster, D. M. (1996). Motivated closing of the
mind: Its cognitive and social effects. Psychological Review, 103, 263–
283.
Kunda, Z. (1990). The case for motivated reasoning. Psychological Bulletin, 108, 480 – 498.
Lord, C. G., Ross, L., & Lepper, M. R. (1979). Biased assimilation and
attitude polarization: The effects of prior theories on subsequently considered evidence. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 37,
2098 –2109.
Lundgren, S. R., & Prislin, R. (1998). Motivated cognitive processing and
attitude change. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 24, 715–
726.
Pinkley, R. L., Griffith, T. L., & Northcraft, G. B. (1995). “Fixed pie” a la

mode: Information availability, information processing, and the negotiation of suboptimal agreements. Organizational Behavior and Human
Decision Processes, 62, 101–112.
Pyszczynski, T., & Greenberg, J. (1987). Toward an integration of cognitive and motivational perspectives on social inference: A biased
hypothesis-testing model. In L. Berkowitz (Eds.), Advances in experimental social psychology (Vol. 20, pp. 297–340). New York: Academic
Press.
Schulz-Hardt, S., Fischer, P., & Frey, D. (2007). Selective exposure to
information: A new explanation based on biased argument evaluation.
Manuscript submitted for publication.
Schulz-Hardt, S., Frey, D., Lüthgens, C., & Moscovici, S. (2000). Biased
information search in group decision making. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 78, 655– 669.
Schulz-Hardt, S., Jochims, M., & Frey, D. (2002). Productive conflict in
group decision making: Genuine and contrived dissent as strategies to
counteract biased information seeking. Organizational Behavior and
Human Decision Processes, 88, 563–586.
Schwarz, N., Frey, D., & Kumpf, M. (1980). Interactive effects of writing
and reading a persuasive essay on attitude change and selective exposure. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 16, 1–17.
Sears, D. O. (1965). Biased indoctrination and selectivity of exposure to
new information. Sociometry, 28, 363–376.
Semin, G. R., & Strack, F. (1980). The plausibility of the implausible: A
critique of Snyder and Swann (1978). European Journal of Social
Psychology, 10, 379 –388.
Slowiaczek, L. M., Klayman, J., Sherman, S. J., & Skov, R. B. (1992).
Information selection and use in hypothesis testing: What is a good
question, and what is a good answer? Memory and Cognition, 20,
392– 405.
Snyder, M., & Swann, W. B., Jr. (1978). Hypothesis-testing processes in
social interaction. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 36,
1202–1212.
Trope, Y., & Liberman, A. (1996). Social hypothesis-testing: Cognitive
and motivational mechanisms. In E. T. Higgins & A. W. Kruglanski
(Eds.), Social psychology: Handbook of basic principles (pp. 239 –270).
New York: Guilford.
Trope, Y., & Thompson, E. (1997). Looking for the truth in all the wrong
places? Asymmetric search for individuating information about stereotyped group members. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
73, 48 –55.

Received March 2, 2006
Revision received August 1, 2007
Accepted August 2, 2007 䡲

