Journal of Personality and Social Psychology
2008, Vol. 94, No. 3, 382–395

Copyright 2008 by the American Psychological Association
0022-3514/08/$12.00 DOI: 10.1037/0022-3514.94.3.382

Self-Regulation and Selective Exposure: The Impact of Depleted SelfRegulation Resources on Confirmatory Information Processing
Peter Fischer

Tobias Greitemeyer

University of Exeter

University of Sussex

Dieter Frey
Ludwig-Maximilians-University
In the present research, the authors investigated the impact of self-regulation resources on confirmatory
information processing, that is, the tendency of individuals to systematically prefer standpoint-consistent
information to standpoint-inconsistent information in information evaluation and search. In 4 studies with
political and economic decision-making scenarios, it was consistently found that individuals with
depleted self-regulation resources exhibited a stronger tendency for confirmatory information processing
than did individuals with nondepleted self-regulation resources. Alternative explanations based on
processes of ego threat, cognitive load, and mood were ruled out. Mediational analyses suggested that
individuals with depleted self-regulation resources experienced increased levels of commitment to their
own standpoint, which resulted in increased confirmatory information processing. In sum, the impact of
ego depletion on confirmatory information search seems to be more motivational than cognitive in nature.
Keywords: self-regulation, depletion of self-regulation resources, confirmatory information processing,
selective exposure

new information. There are several reasons for this neglect:
Compared with standpoint-consistent information, standpointinconsistent information increases the averse motivational state
of dissonance (Festinger, 1957; Frey, 1986), is more difficult
and complex to process (Ditto & Lopez, 1992; Ditto, Scepansky, Munro, Apanovitch, & Lockhart, 1998), is perceived to be
of low quality (Fischer, Jonas, Frey, & Schulz-Hardt, 2005),
threatens the recipient’s self-concept (Pyszczynski & Greenberg, 1987), and evokes negative emotions (Kruglanski & Klar,
1987). In the context of these findings, seeking and processing
inconsistent information should be a laborious, effortful, and
joyless task that is assumed to require considerable amounts of
self-regulation (i.e., control of the self by the self, cf.
Schmeichel, Vohs, & Baumeister, 2003), if it is to take place at
all. More specifically, if people are to expose themselves to
inconsistent information, they must regulate their immediate
need to receive standpoint-consistent feedback and must endure
the negative cognitions and emotions associated with
standpoint-inconsistent information. Hence, processing of and
confrontation with standpoint-inconsistent information might
require self-regulation resources, which are regarded as a limited resource similar to a kind of energy or strength. Thus, they
can become depleted if a specific task (e.g., enduring the
negative implications of standpoint-inconsistent information)
draws on this type of energy (cf. Muraven & Baumeister, 2000).
In the present research, derived from this line of reasoning, we
tested whether reduced self-regulation resources are associated
with increased biases in confirmatory information processing,
that is, confirmatory information evaluation and confirmatory
information search.

Lack of will power has caused more failure than lack of intelligence
or ability—Flower A. Newhouse

Selective exposure to information addresses the phenomenon
that people tend to prefer information that is consistent with their
decisions, attitudes, and beliefs and, in contrast, neglect information that is standpoint-inconsistent (biased information search). In
previous research it was reported that such biased information
search processes occur in a wide range of areas, such as selfserving conclusions (Holton & Pyszczynski, 1989), stereotypes
(Johnston, 1996), attitudes (Lundgren & Prislin, 1998), expectations (Pinkley, Griffith, & Northcraft, 1995), and individual (Frey,
1986; Jonas, Schulz-Hardt, Frey, & Thelen, 2001) as well as group
decision-making processes (Schulz-Hardt, Frey, Lüthgens, &
Moscovici, 2000). Because it is known that confirmatory information search can severely decrease decision quality (cf. Janis, 1982;
Kray & Galinsky, 2003), it is important to investigate factors and
psychological processes that affect confirmatory tendencies in
information processing and information search.
Selective exposure is often caused by a person’s tendency to
neglect standpoint-inconsistent information when searching for
Peter Fischer, School of Psychology, University of Exeter, Exeter,
England; Tobias Greitemeyer, Department of Psychology, University of
Sussex, Brighton, England; Dieter Frey, Department of Psychology, Social
Psychology Unit, Ludwig-Maximilians-University, Munich, Germany.
Peter Fischer and Tobias Greitemeyer contributed equally to this article.
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to
Peter Fischer, School of Psychology, University of Exeter, Exeter
EX4 4QG, England, or to Tobias Greitemeyer, Department of Psychology, University of Sussex, Pevensey 1, BN1 9QH, England. E-mail:
pfischer@psy.uni-muenchen.de or t.greitemeyer@sussex.ac.uk
382

SELF-REGULATION AND SELECTIVE EXPOSURE

Research on Confirmatory Information Processing
Confirmatory information processing has been observed in a
variety of different research contexts, including positive test strategies in hypothesis testing (e.g., Klayman & Ha, 1987; Snyder &
Swann, 1978), judgment biases and sampling errors (Fiedler,
Brinkmann, Betsch, & Wild, 2000), anchoring effects and information processing (Chapman & Johnson, 1999), information processing in the context of child aggression (Dodge & Crick, 1990),
mood and motivation’s impact on the evaluation of persons (Isbell
& Wyer, 1999), and comparison processes in social judgments
(Mussweiler, 2003).
In the present research, we consider how people evaluate and
search for standpoint-consistent and standpoint-inconsistent information after they have made a preliminary decision. With regard to
information search, dissonance theory is the dominant theoretical
and empirical framework. According to dissonance theory, after
having made a decision, individuals experience cognitive dissonance because of the negative implications of the chosen alternative and the positive implications of the nonchosen alternative
(Festinger, 1957, 1964). Because dissonance is perceived as an
aversive arousal state, people are motivated to reduce this unpleasant psychological state. One way of doing this is through selective
exposure to information, that is, searching for information that is
consistent with one’s decision and/or neglecting information that is
inconsistent (Frey, 1986). The extent to which a person prefers
standpoint-consistent over standpoint-inconsistent information
(i.e., the difference between number of chosen consistent pieces of
information and number of chosen inconsistent pieces of information) is also called confirmation bias and is the typical indicator of
selective exposure (e.g., Jonas et al., 2001). Various situational
variables that increase confirmatory information search have been
identified, such as limited availability of information (Fischer et
al., 2005), negative mood (Jonas, Graupmann, & Frey, 2006), or
high commitment (Schwarz, Frey, & Kumpf, 1980).
With regard to information evaluation, related studies have
addressed how people evaluate information as a function of their
decisions, opinions, attitudes, and expectations (biased assimilation research). Similar to the findings on biased information
search, biased assimilation research has reliably revealed that
information that is consistent with one’s standpoint is systematically assessed as being of higher quality (i.e., more credible and
more important) than standpoint-inconsistent information (cf. Edwards & Smith, 1996; Greitemeyer & Schulz-Hardt, 2003). These
findings have mainly been explained by individuals’ tendency to
test inconsistent information more critically and extensively (e.g.,
Ditto & Lopez, 1992; Ditto et al., 1998). Because biased information evaluation and search are strongly interconnected (e.g., Fischer et al., 2005), they are combined in the present research into
an overall index of confirmatory information processing and are
investigated as a function of the availability of self-regulation
resources.

Self-Regulation: Current Research on the Limited
Resource View
Self-regulation is defined as the “exertion of control over the
self by the self” (Muraven & Baumeister, 2000, p. 247). Selfcontrol (or self-regulation, respectively) is used when an individual

383

tries to “change the way he or she would otherwise think, feel, or
behave” (Muraven & Baumeister, 2000, p. 247; see also Baumeister, Bratlavsky, Muraven, & Tice, 1998; Schmeichel et al., 2003).
Thereby, “self-control behaviors are designed to maximize the
long-term best interests of the individual” (Muraven & Baumeister, 2000, p. 247; see also Barkley, 1997). In the context of the
limited resource view, the self has a limited amount of a certain
resource, which in previous literature has been considered as being
similar to a form of “energy or strength” (Schmeichel et al., 2003,
p. 33; see also Baumeister & Heatherton, 1996; Vohs, Baumeister,
& Ciarocco, 2005). This self-regulation resource can be used for
several different tasks, including “regulating thoughts, controlling
emotions, inhibiting impulses” (Schmeichel et al., 2003, p. 33), or
dealing with frustration. However, this resource becomes depleted
when the self actively changes, overrides, or otherwise regulates
psychological and behavioral responses (Baumeister et al., 1998;
Baumeister & Heatherton, 1996; Muraven & Baumeister, 2000;
Schmeichel et al., 2003; Vohs et al., 2005).
A variety of studies has supported the assumption that selfcontrol is a limited resource by demonstrating that prior use of
self-regulation resources leads to impaired subsequent selfregulation performance. In the typical paradigm, people have been
instructed to work on a self-regulation task, for example, actively
guiding attention, withstanding temptation, or controlling cognitions and emotions. Afterward, the performance of another task
involving self-regulation is measured (e.g., decision making, intellectual performance, self-presentation, task persistence), with
the consistent result that the performance of the second selfregulation task is reduced as a consequence of prior self-regulation
behavior (e.g., Baumeister et al., 1998; Muraven, Tice, &
Baumeister, 1998; Schmeichel et al., 2003; Vohs & Heatherton,
2000). Furthermore, an increasing body of research has suggested
that the limited resource of self-regulation is required for various
psychological and behavioral activities, including intellectual performance, decision making, controlling aggressive responses, dieting, positive self-perception and mental health processes, and
impression management and self-presentation (e.g., Baumeister et
al., 1998; Fischer, Greitemeyer, & Frey, 2007; Schmeichel et al.,
2003; Vohs et al., 2005; for an overview, see Muraven & Baumeister, 2000). Most relevant for the present research, reduced states of
ego depletion have also been shown to be associated with reduced
abilities to “persist in the face of frustration or failure”
(Schmeichel et al., 2003, p. 33), which is a first hint that selfregulatory resources are necessary to deal with and withstand the
negative psychological implications of standpoint-inconsistent information or feedback.

Self-Regulation and Confirmatory Information Processing:
The Present Research
In a state of reduced self-regulation resources, people are expected to show an increased tendency for confirmatory information processing. Individuals with depleted self-regulation resources
should avoid and devalue inconsistent information because they
are less able to deal with “frustration or failure” (Schmeichel et al.,
2003, p. 33), and because standpoint-inconsistent information typically contains unfavorable implications for the self (e.g., Pyszczynski & Greenberg, 1987), arouses dissonance and negative emotions (e.g., Frey, 1986; Kruglanski & Klar, 1987), and is laborious

FISCHER, GREITEMEYER, AND FREY

384

to process (Ditto & Lopez, 1992; Ditto et al., 1998). In contrast, in
a state of reduced self-regulation resources (and thus a lower level
of frustration tolerance; cf. Schmeichel et al., 2003), consistent
pieces of information should be evaluated even more positively
and searched for more frequently because they have positive
implications for the depleted self, they can potentially reduce both
dissonance and associated negative affect (Frey, 1986; Jonas et al.,
2006), and they require fewer processing capabilities and are thus
expected to be processed more easily (Ditto & Lopez, 1992; Ditto
et al., 1998; Fischer et al., 2005). Considering these arguments,
one would expect states of reduced self-regulation resources to be
associated with an increased tendency for confirmatory information processing (i.e., increased confirmatory tendencies in information evaluation and search). This perspective on the self and
related confirmatory information processing opens a new, more
dynamic and functional perspective on self-relevant information
processing especially because previous research mostly manipulated self-relevant psychological states not in a quantitative (i.e.,
by quantitatively exhausting the self by ego depletion manipulations) but in a qualitative manner, such as attacking the (selfperceived) attributes of the self by providing negative intelligence
feedback (Frey, 1981) or inductions of negative mood (Jonas et al.,
2006). The impact of the mere dynamic and quantitative regulatory
functioning of the self on confirmatory information processing
(without any qualitative, self-relevant changes caused by attacks or
mood inductions) has been neglected by previous research so far.
The following research comprises four studies aimed to test the
proposition that reduced self-regulation resources following a preceding self-control task increase confirmatory tendencies in information processing. Depletion of self-regulation resources was varied at the beginning of each experiment by letting participants (a)
work on a task that was known to substantially reduce available
self-regulatory resources or (b) work on a task that was known to
draw less on regulatory resources. As a function of resource
depletion manipulation, confirmatory information processing that
occurred in evaluation of and search for standpoint-consistent and
standpoint-inconsistent information was compared between
groups.

Study 1
The goal of this study was to provide initial evidence for our
main hypothesis that individuals with reduced self-regulation resources exhibit a stronger tendency for confirmatory information
processing (i.e., confirmatory information evaluation and search)
than do individuals with unimpaired self-regulation resources.

Method
Participants and design. Forty-nine people (26 females and 23
males) participated in this study (ages ranging between 21 years
and 55 years; M ⫽ 36.84, SD ⫽ 10.52). To circumvent a pure
student sample, participants were recruited both at the LudwigMaximilians-University in Munich, Germany (LMU) and in a
pedestrian zone near the university campus. Of the participants, 15
were students and 34 were nonstudents (26 employed, 8 selfemployed). The study was a one-factorial design with two experimental between-subjects conditions (low depletion of selfregulation resources vs. high depletion of self-regulation
resources).

Material and procedure. After participants arrived at the laboratory, they were told that they were going to participate in two
different and completely unrelated studies. The first study dealt
with person-perception (depletion manipulation), whereas the second study addressed information-perception of political information in the mass media (information evaluation and search). Participants learned that for efficiency reasons both experiments
would be performed together in one experimental session.
The manipulation of self-regulation utilized attention control
and was similar to the type of manipulation successfully used by
Gilbert, Krull, and Pelham, (1988); Schmeichel et al. (2003), and
Fischer et al. (2007). All participants were asked to watch a 5 min
video clip without sound effects that showed the former German
foreign secretary1 in a political interview. Participants were informed that this experiment addressed assessments of personality
characteristics on a nonverbal basis; participants would subsequently have to make person-perception assessments (see
Schmeichel et al., 2003, p. 35) of this former foreign secretary.
Besides the interview footage, the video clip contained a series of
well-known short words (e.g., car, flower) appearing on the lower
third of the screen. Each word was shown for about 10 s and was
printed in white letters on a black background. The appearing
words were not related to the interview. The depletion manipulation took place as follows: In the low depletion condition, participants did not receive any instructions concerning the appearing,
irrelevant words nor were these words mentioned before participants started viewing the video clip. In contrast, in the high
depletion condition, participants were instructed not to look at the
irrelevant words that might appear on the bottom of the computer
screen. In addition, participants in the high depletion condition
were instructed to focus their attention back on the interview with
the foreign secretary whenever they noticed that their attention had
drifted to the words on the lower third of the screen (for a similar
procedure, see Schmeichel et al., 2003). Subsequent to depletion
manipulation, as manipulation checks, participants were asked (a)
“to what extent the previous task was laborious” (0 ⫽ not at all,
10 ⫽ extremely) and (b) “to what extent they were able to concentrate during the previous task” (0 ⫽ not at all, 10 ⫽ extremely;
reverse coded). Both variables were highly correlated (r ⫽ .60,
p ⬍ .001) and were thus collapsed into an overall scale of depletion.
Next, participants were asked to start working on the second
task concerning political information in the mass media, which is
a typical decision paradigm in research on biased information
evaluation and search (cf. Fischer et al., 2005; Frey, 1986). Participants were told that while they were performing their task, the
experimenter would prepare the questionnaires to be used in the
person-perception task of the first study. Participants were informed that the psychology department of the LMU was conducting studies on the reception of political information in the mass
media: The present research was to focus on processes of percep1

This particular former foreign secretary (Hans-Dietrich Genscher) was
a member of the Freie Demokratische Partei (Free Democratic Party; a
rather small liberal German party). Thus, because in the information search
material only information about CDU/CSU versus SPD was used, we
would not expect any interfering effects from the choice of this foreign
secretary as a stimulus for the depletion manipulation.

SELF-REGULATION AND SELECTIVE EXPOSURE

tion, understanding, and assessment of political information as
presented in newspapers and magazines. Following this introduction, participants were asked which one of the two major German
parties, Sozialdemokratische Partei Deutschlands (SocialDemocratic-Party of Germany; SPD) or Christlich Demokratische
Union/Christlich Soziale Union (Christian Democratic Union/
Christian Social Union; CDU/CSU), they would vote for if elections were held tomorrow. This decision was the basis for categorizing standpoint-consistent and standpoint-inconsistent
information. It was also the basis for all further analyses in which
the factor type of decision was used (which is the case for all four
experiments). Next, participants were given 12 pieces of political
information in the form of main theses (two to three sentences in
length). Half of these were consistent and half were inconsistent
with the participants’ political preference (note that consistent
pieces of information were those that go along with the participants’ political opinion, and inconsistent pieces of information
were those that ran counter to the participants’ political opinion).
They were told that lengthier newspaper articles existed for each of
the main theses and could be read in detail after completion of the
experiment. Of the 12 main theses, 3 were consistent and 3 were
inconsistent with the politics of the SPD, and 3 were consistent and
3 were inconsistent with the politics of the CDU/CSU. An example
of a piece of information consistent with the SPD was, “The SPD
has performed well over the last few months. Many important
reforms have been initiated, and the increase in public debts has
been halted.” A piece of information inconsistent with the politics
of the CDU/CSU was, “The current leaders of the CDU/CSU are
not prepared for the political problems facing Germany. Instead of
overcoming Germany’s economic problems, they conduct tasteless
personal attacks on politicians from other parties.” In sum, independent from their specific political opinion, participants were
confronted with 6 pieces of information that were consistent with
their political opinion (i.e., pieces of information that go along
with their political opinion) and 6 pieces of information that were
inconsistent with their political opinion (i.e., pieces of information
that run counter to their political opinion). Participants were asked
to evaluate the quality of each article according to its credibility
(0 ⫽ not at all, 10 ⫽ definitely) and importance (0 ⫽ not at all,
10 ⫽ definitely). Ratings of credibility and importance were highly
correlated (r ⫽ .89, p ⬍ .001) and were thus collapsed into one
scale of information evaluation. After the participants had finished
the information evaluation task, the experimenter collected the
evaluation questionnaires.
In the last part of the experiment, participants were given the
same 12 main theses (6 consistent and 6 inconsistent with their
political opinion) on an extra sheet of paper to prevent demand
effects between information evaluation and information search.
They were asked to indicate which articles they wanted to read in
more detail. Participants were allowed to select freely among the
available pieces of information (i.e., they could select between no
information and 12 pieces of information). Note that in none of the
present studies did participants actually receive the information
they selected. Note also that because preexisting political attitudes
instead of spontaneously made decisions were assessed, we did not
expect any attitude changes from pre- to postinformation evaluation and search. Thus, no final attitude was measured. The same
applies to Study 4. After completing the experiment, participants

385

were informed of the experimental hypotheses, thanked for their
participation, and dismissed.

Results
Manipulation check. A one-way analysis of variance
(ANOVA) with depletion as the independent variable and depletion scale as the dependent variable revealed a significant effect,
F(1, 47) ⫽ 8.38, p ⫽ .01, ␩2 ⫽ .15, indicating that participants in
the high depletion condition (M ⫽ 3.48, SD ⫽ 2.35) reported being
more exhausted than did participants in the low depletion condition (M ⫽ 1.85, SD ⫽ 1.46). Hence, the manipulation of selfregulation resources was successful.
Confirmatory information processing. We computed difference values for information evaluation and information search by
subtracting the corresponding values for standpoint-inconsistent
information from the values for standpoint-consistent information.2 Overall, both a significant evaluation bias (M ⫽ 0.98, SD ⫽
2.89), t(48) ⫽ 4.95, p ⬍ .001, and a significant confirmation bias
in information search (M ⫽ 0.98, SD ⫽ 2.12), t(48) ⫽ 3.24, p ⫽
.002, were observed. For the following analyses, we transformed
both difference values into z values. Because they were highly
correlated (r ⫽ .76, p ⬍ .001), they were collapsed into an overall
index of confirmatory information processing.
A one-way ANOVA with depletion of self-regulation resources
as the independent variable (low vs. high) and confirmatory information processing as the dependent variable revealed a significant
main effect, F(1, 47) ⫽ 4.71, p ⫽ .04, ␩2 ⫽ .09, indicating that
participants with reduced self-regulation resources (M ⫽ 0.27,
SD ⫽ 0.99) exhibited stronger confirmatory information processing tendencies than did nondepleted participants (M ⫽ ⫺0.29,
SD ⫽ 0.80).
Check for interfering effects. Of the participants, 18 were
CDU/CSU voters (7 in the low and 11 in the high depletion
condition) and 31 were SPD voters (17 in the low and 14 in the
high depletion condition). To check for interfering effects of
party preference, sex, and age, a 2 (ego depletion) ⫻ 2 (party
preference) ⫻ 2 (sex) analysis of covariance (ANCOVA) with
confirmatory information processing as the dependent variable
and age as a covariate was performed. With regard to information search, we found a significant main effect for party preference, F(1, 40) ⫽ 37.45, p ⬍ .001, ␩2 ⫽ .48, indicating that
conservative (CDU/CSU) voters (M ⫽ 0.84, SD ⫽ 0.80) exhibited stronger confirmatory information processing tendencies
than did liberal (SPD) voters (M ⫽ ⫺0.49, SD ⫽ 0.61). However, party preference did not interact with the depletion manipulation (F ⬍ 1). Moreover, no significant effects were found
for either gender or age (Fs ⬍ 2.66, ps ⬎ 11). In sum, party
preference, gender, and age are unlikely to systematically affect
our main findings that ego depleted participants exhibit stronger
tendencies for confirmatory information processing than nondepleted participants.
2
Note that standpoint-inconsistent information runs against the participants’ political standpoint and that standpoint-consistent information supports the participants’ political standpoint.

FISCHER, GREITEMEYER, AND FREY

386

confirmatory information processing was expected between nondepleted and ego threatened participants (Contrast 2).

Discussion
Study 1 provided initial evidence that reduced self-regulation
resources lead to elevated confirmatory information processing.
However, a limitation of Study 1 is that we used preexisting
attitudes. Thus, it is not clear whether depletion of self-regulation
resources would have a similar effect on information processing in
the context of preferences that occur more spontaneously within a
shorter time range, as decisions do. In Study 2, we addressed this
shortcoming by using a personnel decision case (in which participants had to make a decision rather than simply indicate their
attitude) about whether to extend the contract of a manager.
Because this decision case is fictional, it is less likely to be
unintentionally affected by a person’s history or prior knowledge.
In addition, we also used an alternative manipulation of depletion
of self-regulation resources to further generalize our findings from
Study 1.
Another limitation of the first study is that the results could be
due to ego threat and/or failure cognitions, which might be imposed by the high depletion condition. Participants who partially
fail to suppress their thoughts might experience an increased level
of failure cognitions and associated negative emotions (cf. Wegner, 1994), which in turn might increase the preference for
standpoint-consistent information and at the same time decrease
the preference for standpoint-inconsistent information (i.e., increased confirmatory information processing). For example, Jonas
et al. (2006) found that induced negative affect increases the
tendency for confirmatory information search. Moreover, Frey
(1981) found that people who received negative feedback on an
intelligence task subsequently exhibited a stronger preference for
information that devalued the validity of intelligence tests than did
people who received positive feedback. However, research on the
impact of ego threat on information processing is not uniform. For
example, there is a body of cognitive-oriented research showing
that individuals’ decision-relevant information processing becomes even more balanced when participants are ego threatened,
for example, in decision cases and associated outcomes that are
framed negatively or that imply subjective risks and personal
losses (e.g., Dawson, Gilovich, & Regan, 2002; Denes-Raj &
Epstein, 1994; Dunegan, 1993; Fischer, Jonas, Frey, & Kastenmüller, et al., in press; Lopes, 1987). Hence, besides generalizing
the results of Study 1 to the context of decisions, Study 2 also
addresses the question of whether the impact of ego depletion on
confirmatory information processing can be distinguished from the
impact of ego threat on confirmatory information processing.

Study 2
The design of Study 2 included three groups: low depletion of
self-regulation resources, high depletion of self-regulation resources, and ego threat. As in Study 1, we expected depleted
participants to exhibit higher levels of confirmatory information
processing than nondepleted participants. As noted above with
regard to ego threat, both increased and reduced confirmatory
information processing could be expected. On the basis of these
considerations, we propose that participants with reduced selfregulation resources exhibit more pronounced confirmatory information processing than do nondepleted and ego threatened participants (Contrast 1). No significant difference regarding

Method
Participants and design. Eighty-five undergraduate students
from LMU (52 women and 33 men) took part in the study.
Participants were recruited on the university campus. The experiment was a one-factorial design with three experimental betweensubjects conditions (high depletion of self-regulation resources vs.
low depletion of self-regulation resources vs. ego threat).
Material and procedure. Participants in all experimental conditions were informed that they were to participate in two different
studies. The first study would deal with processes of cognitive
imagination (high and low depletion of self-regulation resources)
or with recollection of past experiences (ego threat), whereas the
second study would concern processes of personnel decision making. The depletion manipulation was similar to the white bear
paradigm successfully used by Muraven et al. (1998); Wegner,
Schneider, Carter, & White (1987); and Fischer et al. (2007).
Participants were asked to imagine a visit to the zoo and to write
down everything and every animal that came to mind during this
imaginary journey. Participants in the high depletion condition
were instructed not to think about a white bear. Whenever they
thought of a white bear, they were to suppress this thought and
continue thinking about other animals and situations in the zoo.
Participants in the low depletion condition received no such extra
instruction. Because the manipulation of self-regulation resources
in this study (as well as in the following studies) has been successfully used in various previously published studies (e.g., Fischer et al., 2007; Muraven et al., 1998), we abstained from using
manipulation checks.
Instead of the white bear task, participants in the ego threat
condition wrote a short essay about the most embarrassing situation in their life (for a related procedure in the context of selfaffirmation research, see Steele & Liu, 1983). They were asked to
recall this situation to the best of their ability and to try to recall
how they had felt. As a manipulation check for ego threat, participants in all three conditions were asked, on a scale from 1 (not at
all) to 7 (extremely), to what extent they felt frustrated, uncomfortable, restive, and worried. Because all items were correlated
between r ⫽ .42 and r ⫽ .71 ( ps ⬍ .001), they were collapsed into
a scale of ego threat (␣ ⫽ .87).
Next, in accordance with former research on selective exposure,
we used a decision paradigm in which participants had to decide
on the basis of the following cover story whether the contract of a
manager (Mr. Miller) should be extended (Fischer et al., 2005;
Fischer, Schulz-Hardt, & Frey, in press; Frey, 1986). Mr. Miller
had been taken on to manage a fashion store 1 year ago. The
participants were to imagine being the storeowner. They had
inherited the fashion store and had been looking for an expert (like
Mr. Miller) to run the business. Mr. Miller’s contract had been
limited to 1 year; after this year, further negotiations were started
concerning a possible prolongation of the contract. The participants were told that Mr. Miller’s tenure had been of mixed success.
For example, he was successful in gaining new customers by
launching new product lines. However, some regular customers
had been lost because they were not attracted by the store’s new
men’s fashion and women’s fashion collections. Overall positive

SELF-REGULATION AND SELECTIVE EXPOSURE

and negative aspects, attributes, and achievements of Mr. Miller’s
work were balanced. After reading this background information
about Mr. Miller’s work so far as a manager, participants made a
preliminary decision on whether to extend his contract. As in all
other present studies, the preliminary decision was always the
basis for deciding whether participants choose standpointconsistent versus standpoint inconsistent information.
Subsequently, participants were told that additional information
regarding the decision problem was available. These additional
pieces of information consisted of 12 one-page statements written
by Mr. Miller’s former colleagues. Each piece of information
(statement) was summarized by a main thesis of about two sentences. The main thesis contained the key argument of the corresponding statement and indicated whether the colleague was in
favor of or against a prolongation of Mr. Miller’s working contract. An example of a main thesis in favor of an extension was,
“Mr. Miller’s work has been satisfactory; therefore, his contract
should be extended.” An example of a main thesis against an
extension was, “Mr. Miller hasn’t fulfilled our expectations; therefore, his contract shouldn’t be extended.” Hence, independent of
whether the participants were in favor of or against an extension of
the contract, 6 statements supported their decision (i.e., decisionconsistent information) and 6 statements conflicted with it (i.e.,
decision-inconsistent information).
Participants were instructed to evaluate the expected quality of
all available pieces of information with regard to their credibility
(“How credible do you expect this information to be?” 0 ⫽ not at
all, 10 ⫽ extremely) and importance (“How important will this
information be for making a good decision?” 0 ⫽ not at all, 10 ⫽
extremely). Because credibility and importance assessments were
highly correlated (r ⫽ .85, p ⬍ .001), they were collapsed into a
scale of information evaluation. After information evaluation, participants were asked to indicate which articles they wanted to read
in more detail. Participants were allowed to select freely among the
available pieces of information (i.e., they could select between no
information and 12 pieces of information). When participants had
completed their information evaluation and selection, they were
asked to make a final decision on whether to extend Mr. Miller’s
contract. Once the experiment was completed, participants were
debriefed, thanked for their participation, and dismissed.

387

formation from the values for decision-consistent information.
Overall, a significant evaluation bias (M ⫽ 1.11, SD ⫽ 1.96),
t(84) ⫽ 5.25, p ⬍ .001, and confirmation bias in information
search (M ⫽ 0.33, SD ⫽ 1.48), t(84) ⫽ 2.05, p ⫽ .04, occurred.
For the following analyses, we transformed both difference values
into z values. Because they were highly correlated (r ⫽ .82, p ⬍
.001), they were collapsed into an overall index of confirmatory
information processing.
A one-way ANOVA with the experimental condition (low depletion vs. high depletion vs. ego threat) as the independent variable and confirmatory information processing as the dependent
variable revealed a significant overall effect, F(2, 82) ⫽ 4.05, p ⫽
.02, ␩2 ⫽ .09. Planned contrasts revealed that the confirmatory
information processing tendencies of participants with reduced
self-regulation resources (contrast weight: 2; M ⫽ 0.36, SD ⫽
1.08) were stronger than those of nondepleted (contrast weight:
⫺1; M ⫽ ⫺0.19, SD ⫽ 0.53) and ego threatened participants
(contrast weight: ⫺1; M ⫽ ⫺0.18, SD ⫽ 0.81), t(82) ⫽ 2.85, p ⬍
.01. In contrast, the related irrelevant orthogonal contrast comparing ego threat (contrast weight: 1) with the nondepletion condition
(contrast weight: ⫺1; contrast weight for high depletion: 0) did not
reach significance, t(82) ⬍ 1.
Check for interfering effects. In the preliminary decision, 30
participants decided for prolongation and 55 decided for termination of the manager’s contract; in the final decision, 33 decided for
prolongation and 50 decided for termination; 2 participants did not
indicate a final decision. We checked for interfering effects concerning gender and preliminary decision by conducting a 3 (experimental condition) ⫻ 2 (preliminary decision) ⫻ 2 (gender)
ANCOVA with confirmatory information processing as the dependent variable and age as a covariate. No significant main effects or
interactions occurred for these checking variables (Fs ⬍ 1, ps ⬎
.54). Finally, when negative emotions related to ego threat were
controlled as a covariate, the impact of the relevant contrast
(contrast weights: high depletion ⫽ 2; low depletion ⫽ ⫺1; ego
threat ⫽ ⫺1) on confirmatory information processing was still
significant ( p ⬍ .01), and negative emotions had no significant
impact on the overall index of confirmatory information processing (F ⬍ 1). In addition, no effect was found for the remaining
irrelevant orthogonal contrast when negative emotions related to
ego threat were controlled as a covariate, (Fs ⬍ 2.06, ps ⬎ .15).

Results
Manipulation check. A one-way ANOVA with experimental
condition as the independent variable and ego threat as the dependent variable revealed a significant effect, F(2, 82) ⫽ 3.15, p ⬍
.05, ␩2 ⫽ .07. As intended, planned contrasts revealed that participants in the ego threat condition reported higher levels of ego
threat (contrast weight: 2; M ⫽ 3.52, SD ⫽ 1.85) than did participants in the high (contrast weight: ⫺1; M ⫽ 2.72, SD ⫽ 1.18) and
low depletion conditions (contrast weight: ⫺1; M ⫽ 2.66, SD ⫽
1.17), t(82) ⫽ 2.51, p ⬍ .02. Thus, the manipulation was successful. The remaining irrelevant orthogonal contrast comparing high
ego depletion (contrast weight: 1) versus low ego depletion (contrast weight: ⫺1; ego threat, contrast weight: 0) reached no significance, t(82) ⬍ 1.
Confirmatory information processing. As in Study 1, we computed difference values for information evaluation and search by
subtracting the corresponding values for decision-inconsistent in-

Discussion
By the use of an alternative decision case in which participants
had to make a decision rather than simply indicate their own
attitude, Study 2 replicated the findings of Study 1; that is, participants with reduced self-regulation resources exhibited more pronounced confirmatory information processing tendencies than did
participants without reduced self-regulation resources. Furthermore, we found evidence that depletion of self-regulation resources and ego threat had different effects on confirmatory information processing: In contrast to the high depletion condition, ego
threatened participants exhibited rather balanced information processing tendencies.
It is interesting to note that (in contrast to the ego depletion
manipulation) the ego threat manipulation resulted not in increased
levels of confirmatory information processing but in balanced
information processing. In the light of previous research, in which

FISCHER, GREITEMEYER, AND FREY

388

both increasing (e.g., Jonas et al., 2006) and decreasing (e.g.,
Fischer, Jonas, et al., in press) levels of confirmatory information
processing as a function of ego threat manipulations (e.g., by
inducing negative emotions, failure cognitions, or loss cues) were
found, this result could have been somehow expected as a mean of
both tendencies that can occur in this context. However, to make
a clearer and more generalized distinction between effects of ego
threat and depletion of self-regulation resources on confirmatory
information processing, we conducted a further study in which we
used an alternative manipulation of ego threat.

Study 3
Besides ego threat, another important potential alternative explanation for the findings of the first two studies must be noted.
Namely, one could argue that the observed effects of reduced
self-regulation resources on confirmatory information processing
might be a result of cognitive load resulting from fatigue and
exhaustion induced by the ego depletion manipulation. For instance, if a person is exhausted after working on difficult math
tasks, he or she would probably experience cognitive load and
might thus no longer be able to engage in greater scrutiny and
increased cognitive effort in counterarguing and actively devaluing
standpoint-inconsistent information. In Study 3, we investigated
whether cognitive load can be an alternative explanation for the
impact of reduced self-regulation resources on confirmatory information search.
As for ego threat, research results on the impact of cognitive
load on information processing are somewhat mixed. Some authors found that cognitive load increases confirmatory tendencies
in information processing (e.g., for stereotypes, see Bodenhausen,
1990; for self-relevant information processing, see Paulhus, Graf,
& Van Selst, 1989); others found that cognitive load leads to more
balanced information processing (e.g., for information evaluation,
see Ditto & Lopez, 1992, and Ditto et al., 1998; for information
search, see Fischer et al., 2005; for stereotype maintenance, see
Yzerbyt, Coull, & Rocher, 1999). Accounts proposing that cognitive load increases bias in information processing assume that
under circumstances of cognitive busyness, automatic responses
will dominate information processing. In other words, because
self-consistent information and/or knowledge is embedded more
deeply and strongly in an individual’s cognitive system, under
cognitive load, self-consistent information and/or knowledge will
have a retrieval advantage and will thus dominate standpointrelevant information processing (see Paulhus et al., 1989). In
contrast, the main argument for why cognitive load can also reduce
bias in information processing is that it prevents counterarguing
against inconsistent evidence (e.g., Ditto & Lopez, 1992; Ditto et
al., 1998; Fischer et al., 2005; Yzerbyt et al., 1999). For example,
Ditto and Lopez (1992) showed that individuals under cognitive
load were less able to critically test inconsistent information and
were thus more balanced in information evaluation than were
participants without a cognitive load manipulation (see also Ditto
et al., 1998). Moreover, Yzerbyt et al. (1999) found that increased
stereotype change could result when social perceivers have been
made cognitively busy. Finally, Fischer et al. (2005) found that
information evaluation and search after a preliminary decision was
less biased under cognitive load than without cognitive load.

We propose that ego depletion and cognitive load are distinct
psychological concepts and thus have distinct effects on confirmatory information processing. Ego depletion is more motivational,
whereas cognitive load is more cognitive in nature. More specifically, because of increased exhaustion, ego depleted individuals
want to approach standpoint-consistent information and avoid
standpoint-inconsistent information (to protect their standpoint).
Consequently, they exhibit a strong tendency for confirmatory
information processing. In contrast, individuals under cognitive
load are not motivated to avoid standpoint-inconsistent information. It is simply that they have fewer cognitive resources and are
therefore not able to effectively counterargue and devalue inconsistent information. As a result, they demonstrate a more balanced
and less confirmatory brand of information processing.
To test whether ego depletion, ego threat, and cognitive load
indeed have differential effects on confirmatory information processing, we used four experimental conditions in Study 3: (a) high
depletion condition—participants whose self-regulation resources
were depleted prior to information evaluation and search by keeping in mind complex rules during a concentration task; (b) low
depletion condition—participants without depleted self-regulation
resources prior to information evaluation and search; (c) cognitive
load condition: participants who were constrained by cognitive
load while evaluating and selecting decision-relevant information;
and (d) ego threat condition—participants who were ego threatened prior to information evaluation and search by the expectation
of having to have a group discussion with people who held the
opposite standpoint to themselves. We also assessed participants’
mood to examine whether our findings can be explained by differences in affective experience. Specifically, we expected participants with reduced self-regulation resources to exhibit more pronounced confirmatory information processing than exhibited by
participants in low depletion, cognitive load, and ego threat conditions. In contrast, lower levels of confirmatory information processing were expected for cognitive load, low depletion, and ego
threat conditions (i.e., no differences were expected for the related
orthogonal contrasts).

Method
Participants and design. Seventy-three undergraduate psychology students (58 females and 15 males) participated in this
study (ages ranging between 18 years and 44 years; M ⫽ 24.34,
SD ⫽ 7.22). Participants were recruited in an introductory psychology course. The experiment was a one-factorial design with
four experimental between-subjects conditions (high depletion of
self-regulation resources vs. low depletion of self-regulation resources vs. cognitive load vs. ego threat).
Material and procedure. Participants in the conditions with
high and low depletion of self-regulation resources learned that
they would participate in two different and completely unrelated
studies. The first study dealt with concentration tests, the second
dealt with economic decision making. Regulation resource depletion manipulation was modeled on a successful regulation resource
depletion procedure by Baumeister et al. (1998) and Fischer et al.
(2007): Participants received a standard letter-size sheet of paper
(European size A4) bearing a difficult scientific text. In the low
depletion condition, participants were asked to underline all letter
es (e.g., Gertrud). In the high depletion condition, participants had

SELF-REGULATION AND SELECTIVE EXPOSURE

to consider extra rules. They were instructed to underline all es
only when the es were not directly preceded or followed by
another vowel. In addition, participants were not to underline those
es that lay only two letters away from another vowel (e.g., no e
should be underlined in the name Peter). No time limit was set for
participants working on this concentration task.
Subsequently, participants began the second study involving
decision making. Participants in all four experimental conditions
were introduced to a decision task that concerned an investment
decision. Specifically, participants had to decide whether to open
a fast food restaurant offering either only organic food or only
low-fat products. After their preliminary decision, participants in
the cognitive load condition (but not in the three remaining conditions) were asked to memorize a seven-digit number during the
subsequent information search and evaluation tasks. Note that as a
cover story, participants were informed that in the present study
multitasking abilities were being investigated. This cognitive load
manipulation was derived from Ditto and Lopez (1992), who
successfully used a similar procedure. Participants in the ego threat
condition did not have to work on the memorizing task but were
informed that after this decision task, they would have a discussion
with other participants who had made the opposite decision; as a
cover story, participants were informed that group discussions
increase the quality of decision outcomes. This ego threat manipulation was derived from similar procedures used in previous
research (e.g., De Dreu & van Knippenberg, 2005). Participants in
the high depletion, low depletion, and load condition received no
such extra inductions.
After their preliminary decision (which is the critical decision
that was used for all further analyses as well as for deciding which
pieces of information were decision-consistent and decisioninconsistent for the participants), all participants reported their
positive and negative emotions with the Positive and Negative
Affect Scales (PANAS; Watson, Clark, & Tellegen, 1988). Then,
participants were told that eight pieces of additional information
were available concerning this decision problem. Of the additional
pieces of information, half supported and half conflicted with the
participants’ prior decision. An example of information consistent
with the organic fast food idea was, “Organic food products taste
better than low-fat food products. Thus, one should support the
organic fast food concept.” An example of a piece of information
consistent with the low-fat fast food idea was, “Low-fat food
products are consistent with the current zeitgeist. Thus, one should
support the low-fat fast food concept.” As in previous studies,
participants were first asked to evaluate the quality of each article
according to its credibility (0 ⫽ not at all, 10 ⫽ definitely) and
importance (0 ⫽ not at all, 10 ⫽ definitely). After participants had
finished the information evaluation task, the experimenter collected all questionnaires. In the final part of the experiment,
participants were given the same eight main theses on an extra
sheet of paper. Participants were asked to indicate which articles
they wanted to read in more detail. Participants were allowed to
select freely among the available pieces of information (i.e., they
could select between zero and eight pieces of information). Finally, they were asked to make a final investment decision (which
is helpful to investigate how many participants change their opinion because of the additionally presented information). After completing the experiment, participants were informed of the experimental hypotheses, thanked for their participation, and dismissed.

389

Results
Confirmatory information processing. We computed difference values for information evaluation and information search by
subtracting the corresponding values for decision-inconsistent information from the values for decision-consistent information.
Because of the missing values in the main dependent variables,
three participants had to be excluded from further data analyses.
Overall, a significant evaluation bias (M ⫽ 0.58, SD ⫽ 1.76),
t(69) ⫽ 2.75, p ⫽ .01, as well as a marginally significant confirmation bias in information search (M ⫽ 0.27, SD ⫽ 1.32), t(69) ⫽
1.72, p ⫽ .09, occurred. For the following analyses, we transformed both difference values into z values. Because they were
highly correlated (r ⫽ .53, p ⬍ .001), they were collapsed into an
overall index of confirmatory information processing.
A one-way ANOVA with four experimental conditions as the
independent variable and confirmatory information processing as
the dependent variable revealed a significant overall effect, F(3,
66) ⫽ 4.07, p ⫽ .01, ␩2 ⫽ .16. Planned contrasts revealed that
confirmatory information processing of participants with reduced
self-regulation resources (contrast weight: 3; M ⫽ 0.62, SD ⫽
1.05) was stronger than that of nondepleted participants (contrast
weight: ⫺1; M ⫽ ⫺0.14, SD ⫽ 0.72), ego threatened participants
(contrast weight: ⫺1; M ⫽ ⫺0.29, SD ⫽ 0.85), and cognitive load
participants (contrast weight: ⫺1; M ⫽ ⫺0.11, SD ⫽ 0.62),
t(66) ⫽ 3.41, p ⫽ .001. In contrast, no significant orthogonal
contrast was found when we compared nondepleted condition
(contrast weight: 2) with ego threat condition (contrast weight:
⫺1) and cognitive load condition (contrast weight: ⫺1; high
depletion received the contrast weight 0), t(66) ⬍ 1. Finally, no
significant orthogonal contrast was found when we compared ego
threat condition (contrast weight: ⫺1) with cognitive load condition (contrast weight: 1; the high depletion and low depletion
conditions both received the contrast weight 0), t(66) ⬍ 1.
Check for interfering effects. To check for interfering effects
of type of decision, sex, and age, a 4 (experimental condition) ⫻
2 (type of preliminary decision)3 ⫻ 2 (sex) ANCOVA with confirmatory information processing as the dependent variable and
age as a covariate revealed that age and sex were not significantly
associated with confirmatory information processing (Fs ⬍ 1,
ps ⬎ .57) nor did they interact with experimental condition (Fs ⬍
1.36, ps ⬎ .26). However, there was a significant effect for type of
decision, F(1, 54) ⫽ 8.67, p ⫽ .01, as well as an interaction
between type of decision and experimental condition, F(3, 54) ⫽
3.81, p ⫽ .02. However, for both decision alternatives, the strongest confirmatory information processing occurred in the high
depletion condition (compared with the other 3 experimental conditions). Furthermore, the main effect for experimental condition
( p ⫽ .02) as well as the relevant contrast ( p ⬍ .01) were still
significant when the impact of preliminary decision was controlled
for.
Regarding the mood measure, a 4 (experimental condition) ⫻ 2
(mood: positive vs. negative) ANOVA with repeated measures on
3

In the preliminary decision, 58 participants decided for the organic
food restaurant, and 12 decided for the low-fat restaurant; in the final
decision, 59 decided for the organic food restaurant, and 11 decided for the
low-fat restaurant.

390

FISCHER, GREITEMEYER, AND FREY

the last factor revealed a significant effect for mood, F(1, 66) ⫽
85.65, p ⬍ .001, indicating that participants experienced a stronger
positive (M ⫽ 2.65) than negative mood (M ⫽ 1.58). More
important, the interaction was not significant, F(3, 66) ⫽ 1.13, p
.34. Thus, mood did not differ as a function of experimental
condition and could thus not mediate the effect of depletion on the
overall index of confirmatory information processing.

Discussion
In summary, Study 3 replicated the findings of the previous two
studies by use of an alternative (economic) decision scenario:
Again, participants with reduced self-regulation resources exhibited a stronger tendency for confirmatory information processing
than did nondepleted participants. Moreover, we used two further
experimental conditions— cognitive load and ego threat—to eliminate them as possible alternative explanations for the effect of
regulation resource depletion on confirmatory information processing. Compared with participants in high depletion condition,
participants in cognitive load and ego threat conditions showed a
significantly attenuated tendency for confirmatory information
processing. Moreover, the effect of high depletion of selfregulation resources on confirmatory information processing was
not mediated by mood.
However, please note that the reduced bias in the threat condition might be due to the specific manipulation used in Study 3.
Because participants expected to discuss their decision with persons who were in favor of the opposite standpoint, it might be
especially useful to read inconsistent information in order to gain
more knowledge about possible counterarguments.4 However, the
effects of ego threat on information processing in Study 3 were
similar to the effects in Study 2, in which a different ego threat
manipulation was used. Hence, we can confidently assume that
ego threat is unlikely to represent an alternative explanation for the
effect of depleted self-regulation resources on confirmatory information processing.
Moreover, it is important to look at cognitive load results: We
found that in a classic selective exposure paradigm (cf. Frey, 1986)
cognitive load and ego depletion had opposite effects on confirmatory information processing. That is, ego depleted participants
exhibited an increased tendency for confirmatory information processing, whereas cognitive load participants processed information
in a relatively balanced way. How can cognitive load have such a
differential effect compared with ego depletion? In our opinion,
the answer lies in the assumption that ego depletion is more of a
motivational state, whereas cognitive load is more of a cognitive
psychological state. This psychological difference should mainly
result from the differential way both psychological states are
manipulated or induced. That is, ego depletion manipulations are
carried out before participants work on the dependent variable—in
our case, information evaluation and search (cf. Schmeichel et al.,
2003; Vohs et al., 2005). In contrast, cognitive load manipulations
are carried out simultaneously while participants work on the
dependent variables (cf. Ditto & Lopez, 1992; Ditto et al., 1998;
Fischer et al., 2005; Paulhus et al., 1989). As a consequence, ego
depleted participants are fatigued immediately before they start
working on the dependent measures (in our case, information
evaluation and search), whereas cognitive load participants start
with their full amount of regulatory resources (which just might

decline over time while participants work on information evaluation and search). We do not argue that cognitive load manipulations cannot lead to states of ego depletion. Rather we feel it safe
to assume that because of the different point in time of the
manipulation, participants under cognitive load are in a different
psychological state while working on information evaluation and
search than are ego depleted participants. That is, ego depleted
participants should be already fatigued when they begin to work on
information evaluation and search, whereas cognitive load participants simply tire over time.
Derived from this line of argument, ego depletion should be a
more motivational state that leads participants to a priori avoid
standpoint-inconsistent information and approach standpointconsistent information (in order to prevent high processing efforts
in a state of fatigue). In contrast, participants under cognitive load
do not intentionally avoid standpoint-inconsistent information but,
because of cognitive busyness, are not able to effectively counterargue and devalue inconsistent information (see Ditto & Lopez,
1992; Ditto et al., 1998; Fischer et al., 2005). To conclude, on the
basis of the findings in Study 3, we propose that ego depletion is
more of a motivational state (i.e., ego depleted participants do not
want to confront effortful standpoint-inconsistent evidence),
whereas cognitive load is more of a cognitive state (i.e., cognitively busy participants cannot counterargue standpointinconsistent information so effectively). As a consequence, ego
depletion should lead to increased confirmatory information processing, whereas cognitive load should lead to more balanced
information processing, which is indeed the pattern observed in
Study 3.
Finally, it is important to discuss the somewhat unexpected
finding that participants in the low depletion condition were not
more biased than participants in the cognitive load condition,
which seems to be inconsistent with previous research on selective
exposure that has mainly shown a general preference for supporting information. There are at least two possible explanations for
this finding. First, underlining es in a speed test (even if there were
no complex rules to keep in mind as in the high depletion condition) could have led to a somewhat cautious mindset, which might
have yielded a more balanced way to deal with standpointconsistent and standpoint-inconsistent information. Second, the
economic decision case forced people to decide between two
business ideas, which might have brought participants into a careful economic mind set and—without an additional experimental
manipulation—might thus have potentially prevented increased
confirmatory information processing in the low depletion control
group. This notion is supported by other studies that also failed to
show a significant confirmation bias in the control condition when
using similar economic or personnel decision problems (e.g.,
Fischer et al., 2005; Jonas, Greenberg, & Frey, 2003). Note,
however, in this regard the crucial comparison was the high ego
depletion condition with the cognitive load condition. Whereas
depleted self-regulation resources led to increased tendencies for
confirmatory information processing, cognitive load led to relatively balanced information processing. Thus, although these explanations for this finding are somewhat speculative, the results do
4

We thank an anonymous reviewer of a previous version of this article
for this important point.

SELF-REGULATION AND SELECTIVE EXPOSURE

not affect the main result of our series of experiments, namely that
high ego depletion manipulations increase the tendency for confirmatory information processing.

Study 4
Now that we have ruled out plausible alternative explanations
for our findings (i.e., ego threat, cognitive load, mood), we try to
elucidate the psychological process believed to underlie our main
findings more directly, by mediational analysis. The results of
Study 3 suggest that the impact of ego depletion on confirmatory
information search is more motivational than cognitive in nature.
One classic, highly motivational variable in confirmatory information processing and selective exposure research is commitment,
which represents increased motivational binding as well as affective attachment toward a specific decision, attitude, or standpoint
(Festinger, 1964; Kiesler, 1971). Increased commitment to a standpoint has been found to be associated with increased dissonance
arousal and enhanced tendencies to defend one’s own standpoint
(Frey, 1986). Accordingly, previous research has consistently
shown that elevated commitment to a specific standpoint increases
confirmatory information processing (e.g., Brock & Balloun,
1967; Frey & Stahlberg, 1986; Schwarz, Frey, & Kumpf, 1980;
Sweeney & Gruber, 1984). We propose that states of reduced
self-regulatory resources (ego depletion) go along with increased
feelings of affective commitment toward one’s own standpoint.
Because of the weakened self, individuals in a state of ego depletion might cling more strongly to their standpoints and positions to
immunize themselves against attacks of inconsistent evidence and
information coming from external sources. This process should be
a rather functional one because ego depleted individuals should be
less able to actively and effectively defend their own positions.
In short, in the last experiment we tested whether commitment
to one’s own standpoint mediates the effect of reduced selfregulation resources on confirmatory tendencies in information
processing. We expected individuals with reduced self-regulation
resources to experience an increased sense of commitment to their
standpoint in order to protect their weakened and exhausted selves.
Hence, individuals with reduced self-regulation resources should
be more committed to their own standpoint, which in turn should
increase confirmatory tendencies in information processing.

Method
Participants and design. Forty-eight people (35 females and
13 males) participated (ages ranging between 20 years and 54
years; M ⫽ 35.12, SD ⫽ 9.76). Participants were recruited from
both LMU and a pedestrian zone near the university campus. Of
the participants, 14 were students and 34 were nonstudents (17
employees, 17 self-employed). The experiment was based on a
one-factorial design with two experimental between-subjects conditions (low depletion of self-regulation resources vs. high depletion of self-regulation resources).
Material and procedure. Material and procedure in Study 4
were similar to those in Study 1, except that we used an alternative
depletion manipulation—an emotion control task, which has been
successfully used by Baumeister et al. (1998), Fischer et al. (2007),
and Schmeichel et al. (2003). When participants arrived at the
laboratory, they were informed that the present research would

391

involve investigation of the association between experience of
emotions and decision making. The first part of the investigation
involved watching an amusing animated cartoon, whereas the
second part involved making a decision. In the high depletion
condition, participants were instructed to try not to experience,
feel, or show any emotions while watching the cartoon (suppress
emotions condition; cf. Baumeister et al., 1998). To control
whether participants followed this instruction, the experimenter
said that they would be videotaped while they watched the cartoon
(which was actually not the case). In contrast, in the low depletion
condition, participants were instructed to freely express their emotions while watching the cartoon. To avoid possible confounding
effects in the experimental design, participants in the no suppression condition were also told that they would be videotaped (cf.
Schmeichel et al., 2003). Following these instructions, all participants watched a 5 min video clip from the U.S. cartoon series The
Simpsons. This episode included no political content (Homer
Simpson and his daughter purchased a spa and, while doing so,
dreamed about their future).
Subsequently, on a measure derived from typical measures of
commitment in selective exposure research (e.g., Jonas et al.,
2001) participants were asked, on a scale from 0 (not at all) to 10
(extremely), (a) “to what extent they feel committed to their current
political affiliation,” (b) “to what extent they would suffer if their
political affiliation was attacked,” and (c) “to what extent they are
sure about the validity of their political affiliation.” Because these
three items were highly correlated (rs ranging between .70 and .72)
they were collapsed into a scale of commitment (␣ ⫽ .87). Afterward, as in Study 1, participants indicated whether they would vote
for the SPD or the CDU/CSU and subsequently received 6
standpoint-consistent and 6 standpoint-inconsistent pieces of information, which they were asked to evaluate (credibility and
importance) and select (information search). Participants were
asked to indicate which articles they wanted to read in more detail,
and they were allowed to select freely among the available pieces
of information (i.e., they could select between no information and
12 pieces of information). On completing the experiment, participants were debriefed, thanked for their participation, and dismissed.

Results
Confirmatory information processing. We computed difference values for information evaluation and search by subtracting
the corresponding values for standpoint-inconsistent information
from the values for standpoint-consistent information. Overall,
both a significant evaluation bias (M ⫽ 3.15, SD ⫽ 3.33), t(47) ⫽
6.56, p ⬍ .001, and a confirmation bias in information search
(M ⫽ 1.31, SD ⫽ 2.23), t(47) ⫽ 4.07, p ⬍ .001, occurred. For the
following analyses, we transformed both difference values into z
values. Because they were highly correlated (r ⫽ .82, p ⬍ .001),
they were collapsed into an overall index of confirmatory information processing.
A one-way ANOVA with depletion of self-regulation resources
as the independent variable (low vs. high) and confirmatory information processing as the dependent variable yielded a significant
effect, F(1, 46) ⫽ 8.82, p ⫽ .01, ␩2 ⫽ .16, indicating that
participants with reduced self-regulation resources (M ⫽ 0.38,
SD ⫽ 0.97) exhibited a more pronounced confirmatory informa-

392

FISCHER, GREITEMEYER, AND FREY

tion processing tendency than did nondepleted participants (M ⫽
⫺0.38, SD ⫽ 0.78).
Commitment. Participants with reduced self-regulation resources (M ⫽ 7.30, SD ⫽ 1.86) reported a stronger commitment to
their political standpoint than did nondepleted participants (M ⫽
5.50, SD ⫽ 2.14), F(1, 45) ⫽ 9.48, p ⬍ .01, ␩2 ⫽ .17.
Mediational analyses. In the following analysis, adhering to
the principles set forth by Baron and Kenny (1986), we tested
whether commitment mediates the effect of depleted selfregulation resources on confirmatory information processing. First
of all, the depletion factor (contrast coded; high depletion: 1, low
depletion: ⫺1) significantly predicted the expected mediator, commitment (␤ ⫽ .42), t(45) ⫽ 3.08, p ⬍ .01. Next, commitment also
significantly predicted confirmatory information processing (␤ ⫽
.58), t(45) ⫽ 4.79, p ⬍ .001. When both depletion of selfregulation resources and commitment were used as predictors for
confirmatory information processing, the overall regression was
significant (R2 ⫽ .38), F(2, 44) ⫽ 13.21, p ⬍ .001. The commitment variable received a significant regression weight (␤ ⫽ .49),
t(44) ⫽ 3.75, p ⫽ .001, whereas the regression weight of depletion
of self-regulation resources was no longer significant (␤ ⫽ .21),
t(44) ⫽ 1.63, p ⬎ .11. The Sobel test was significant (Z ⫽ 2.37,
p ⫽ .02). In sum, commitment was found to mediate the impact
that depleted self-regulation resources have on confirmatory information processing.
Check for interfering effects. Of the participants, 23 were
CDU/CSU voters (11 in the low and 12 in the high depletion
condition) and 25 were SPD voters (13 in the low and 12 in the
high depletion condition). As a check for interfering effects of
party preference, sex, and age, a 2 (depletion of self-regulation
resources) ⫻ 2 (party preference) ⫻ 2 (sex) ANCOVA with
confirmatory information processing as the dependent variable and
age as a covariate was performed. As in Study 1, we found a
significant main effect for party preference, F(1, 39) ⫽ 30.25, p ⬍
.001, ␩2 ⫽ .44, indicating that conservative (CDU/CSU) voters
(M ⫽ 0.58, SD ⫽ 0.89) exhibited stronger confirmatory information processing tendencies than did liberal (SPD) voters (M ⫽
⫺0.53, SD ⫽ 0.66). However, party preference did not interact
with the depletion manipulation (F ⬍ 1). Moreover, no significant
effects were found for either gender or age (Fs ⬍ 2.62, ps ⬎ 11).

Discussion
Study 4 replicated the findings of the previous three studies with
an alternative manipulation of self-regulation resources based on
emotion control. Again, individuals with reduced self-regulation
resources were more inclined to confirmatory information processing than were nondepleted individuals. In addition, Study 4 elucidated the nature of the underlying psychological processes: Depleted self-regulation resources increase individuals’ commitment
to their own standpoint and thus promote confirmatory information
processing. In this regard, it appears that the link between depletion of self-regulation resources and confirmatory information
processes has a motivational component: Individuals with depleted
self-regulation resources exhibit stronger confirmatory information processing tendencies because they cling more to their standpoint.

General Discussion
Recent studies have shown that regulation resources are a limited resource, similar to energy (Baumeister & Heatherton, 1996;
Baumeister et al., 1998; Schmeichel et al., 2003; for an overview,
see Muraven & Baumeister, 2000), which is required for a variety
of tasks, such as decision making, self-presentation, mental health
promotion, or intellectual performance (e.g., Fischer et al., 2007;
Schmeichel et al., 2003; Vohs et al., 2005). Deriving from these
findings, we argued that self-regulation is also essential when
people evaluate and search for new information to validate their
decisions or standpoints. More specifically, it was hypothesized in
particular that the unbiased processing of standpoint-consistent
and standpoint-inconsistent information requires considerable
amounts of self-regulation because standpoint-inconsistent (compared with standpoint-consistent) information implies unfavorable
conclusions that threaten the self-concept (e.g., Pyszczynski &
Greenberg, 1987), requires more processing effort (Ditto & Lopez,
1992; Ditto et al., 1998), and arouses the aversive motivational
state of dissonance (Frey, 1986). Besides avoiding standpointinconsistent information, individuals with reduced self-regulation
resources should also be favorably disposed toward standpointconsistent information because of its general positive implications
for the exhausted, impaired self (e.g., Frey, 1986). Combining
these arguments, individuals with reduced self-regulation resources were expected to exhibit a stronger tendency for confirmatory information processing than were nondepleted individuals.
The present four studies consistently supported this line of
reasoning: Participants with depleted self-regulation resources exhibited stronger confirmatory information processing tendencies
than did nondepleted participants. This pattern of results was
consistently found across four different manipulations of selfregulation resources (i.e., an attention control task, a concentration
task, a thought-suppression task, and an emotion control task),
which supports the generalizability of the effect. We also found
that the effect of reduced self-regulation resources on confirmatory
information processing is not likely to be due to processes of ego
threat (Studies 2 and 3), cognitive load (Study 3), or mood (Study
3). Finally, Study 4 revealed that the impact of reduced selfregulation resources on confirmatory information processing was
mediated by differences that resulted from subjective commitment
to one’s own standpoint: Individuals with depleted self-regulation
resources clung more to their standpoint (i.e., showed more commitment), which in turn resulted in higher levels of confirmatory
information processing. Although mediational analyses are correlational and are thus still problematic when one tries to interpret
them causally, for the present research they provide a better sense
of the psychological processes involved in the effect of regulation
resource depletion on confirmatory information processing. In
summary, the present research revealed that the unbiased processing of standpoint-relevant information depends on the availability
of regulation resources: When individuals suffer from depletion of
self-regulation resources, they are more inclined to show confirmatory information processing.
The present results support the assumption that self-regulation
and unbiased information processing are based on a similar limited
resource, which can be depleted by preceding self-regulatory activities. Thus, the present research extends our knowledge of the
effect of self-regulation on information processing. In previous

SELF-REGULATION AND SELECTIVE EXPOSURE

research it was found that higher intellectual performance, selfpresentation, and decision making draw on the limited resource of
self-regulation (e.g., Baumeister et al., 1998; Schmeichel et al.,
2003; Vohs et al., 2005), whereas the present research reveals that
self-regulation also plays a role in the (un)biased processing of
standpoint-relevant information. Moreover, the present studies
broaden the understanding of the dynamic self and its impact on
information processing: Previous research on confirmatory information processing predominantly manipulated self-relevant psychological states by qualitatively changing self-relevant states, for
example, by attacking the self (Frey, 1981; Jonas et al., 2006) or by
inducing negative self-relevant mood states (Jonas et al., 2006). To
the best of our knowledge, none of the previous research varied the
quantitative regulation functioning of the self and, as a function,
measured tendencies for confirmatory information processing. In
sum, the present studies add new theoretical insights and results to
the literature on self-regulation and limited resources perspective,
as well as the literature on confirmatory information processing
and search.
Study 3 showed that (compared with cognitive load) depletion
of self-regulation resources has the opposite effect on information
processing and is thus likely to be a qualitatively different process
than cognitive load. Within the same experimental context, participants with depleted self-regulation resources exhibited an increased tendency for confirmatory information search, whereas
participants in the cognitive load condition were relatively balanced in their processing of standpoint-relevant information (as
has also been suggested by previous research; e.g., Ditto & Lopez,
1992; Ditto et al., 1998; Fischer et al., 2005). The following line of
argumentation could integrate both differential findings: Experiments on the effect of cognitive load and quality of information
processing introduce load manipulation and relevant information
at the same time (see, for example, Ditto et al., 1998, Study 2;
Fischer et al., 2005, Study 4; Petty, Wells, & Brock, 1976, Study
2), whereas attention or emotion control as a way of manipulating
self-regulation resources preceded the presentation of information.
If information processing occurs while a second task is attempted
(cognitive load), people’s ability to evaluate new information is
impaired. As a consequence, inconsistent information is not tested
more critically than is consistent information, which may even
result in a decreased bias in information evaluation and search
(Fischer et al., 2005). In contrast, if attention load precedes information processing (which might be induced by depletion manipulations carried out before information evaluation and search), the
motivation to deal with standpoint-consistent and standpointinconsistent information in a balanced way is reduced beforehand,
which may result in an increased confirmation bias. In sum, we
think that the effect of depleted self-regulation resources on external information processing is more motivational in nature,
whereas the effect of cognitive load has more cognitive roots. That
is, depletion manipulations impair and weaken the self and thus
reduce the a priori motivation to deal with decision-relevant information in a balanced way, whereas cognitive load manipulations reduce the cognitive ability to counterargue and thus devalue
inconsistent information while information evaluation and search
is carried out. The first process leads to increased confirmatory
information processing (in order to a priori protect the depleted
self), whereas the latter leads to reduced confirmatory information
processing (because counterargument and devaluation of

393

standpoint-inconsistent information cannot be carried out effectively, and thus, the subjective quality advantage of consistent over
inconsistent information vanishes).
We do not think that the effect of depleted regulation resources
on information processing is limited to evaluation of and search for
new information. Rather, we assume that reduced resources of
self-regulation affect information processing in a more general
way. Future research to investigate whether the present results can
be replicated in alternative information processing contexts would
be beneficial. To give just two examples, it has been shown that
people’s stereotypes influence their interpretation of new evidence; Darley and Gross (1983) have shown that information on a
target person is interpreted in a way that is consistent with the
perceiver’s initial expectations about that person. One might expect this tendency to be augmented when the perceiver suffers
from reduced self-regulation resources, which foster a (perhaps
incorrectly) rigid stereotype. Moreover, the potential effect of
depleted regulation resources on hypothesis testing in a pure
context could be examined by use of a reasoning task such as the
one used by Wason and Johnson-Laird (1972). We would expect
depleted (as opposed to nondepleted) participants to seek more
consistent information while neglecting inconsistent information.
However, these expectations are rather speculative and need to be
backed up empirically.
One shortcoming of our research involves the precise mechanism by which reduced self-regulation resources affect information processing. Baumeister and Muraven and colleagues (e.g.,
Muraven & Baumeister, 2000) have argued that self-control works
similarly to physical muscle and thus represents a limited resource.
Accordingly, recent evidence has revealed that self-control relies
on glucose as a limited energy source (Gailliot et al., 2006). In
keeping with these assumptions, previous research (e.g., Webb &
Sheeran, 2003) revealed that highly depleted participants were
more fatigued than were nondepleted participants. However, other
researchers (Martijn, Tenbült, Merckelbach, Dreezens, & de Vries,
2002) suggested that the temporary depletion of self-regulation
capacity after an initial act of self-control might simply be due to
people’s implicit expectation that self-regulation consumes energy.
If this expectation gets challenged, depletion of self-control no
longer impairs subsequent performance. The present studies’ most
important result—that depletion leads to increased confirmatory
information processing— does not involve a typical performance
measure as found in the studies by Martijn and colleagues (Martijn
et al., 2002). Hence, it is unlikely that the effect of depletion on
information processing is due to participants’ expectations (because information evaluation and search is not obviously connected to performance such as, e.g., intelligence or speed tests are).
Nevertheless, future research that further clarifies the underlying
processes of depletion on information processing would be of
benefit. To this end, expectations of the impact of depletion on
information processing should be assessed or manipulated and the
association between these expectations and confirmatory information processing should be examined.
Finally, from a practical perspective, our results have important
implications for decision making. As all the studies in the present
research (as well as abundant evidence from previous investigations) have revealed, people generally prefer consistent to inconsistent information, which often leads to suboptimal decisions
(Kray & Galinsky 2003). For example, Greitemeyer and Schulz-

FISCHER, GREITEMEYER, AND FREY

394

Hardt (2003) have reported that the tendency to evaluate
standpoint-consistent information more positively than standpointinconsistent information leads to a maintenance of individual
suboptimal preferences. Not only individual but also group decision making is characterized by ignoring undesirable information
(Greitemeyer, Schulz-Hardt, Brodbeck, & Frey, 2006). Our results
point to a potential threat to effective individual and group decision making. People who are in a state of depleted self-regulation
resources are also less likely to exhibit balanced information
processing. Therefore, in order to foster effective decision making,
decision makers with sufficient available self-regulation resources
need to be included.

References
Barkley, R. A. (1997). Behavioral inhibition, sustained attention, and
executive functions: Constructing a unifying theory of ADHD. Psychological Bulletin, 121, 65–94.
Baron, R. M., & Kenny, D. A. (1986). The moderator–mediator variable
distinction in social psychological research: Conceptual, strategic, and
statistical considerations. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
51, 1173–1182.
Baumeister, R. F., Bratlavsky, E., Muraven, M., & Tice, D. M. (1998). Ego
depletion: Is the active self a limited resource? Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 74, 1252–1265.
Baumeister, R. F., & Heatherton, T. F. (1996). Self-regulation failure: An
overview. Psychological Inquiry, 7, 1–15.
Bodenhausen, G. V. (1990). Stereotypes as judgmental heuristics: Evidence of circadian variations in discrimination. Psychological Science,
1, 319 –322.
Brock, T. C., & Balloun, J. C. (1967). Behavioral receptivity to dissonant
information. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 6, 413– 428.
Chapman, G. B., & Johnson, E. J. (1999). Anchoring, activation, and the
construction of values. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision
Processes, 79, 115–153.
Darley, J. M., & Gross, P. H. (1983). A hypothesis-confirming bias in
labeling effects. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 44,
20 –33.
Dawson, E., Gilovich, T., & Regan, D. T. (2002). Motivated reasoning and
performance on the Wason Selection Task. Personality and Social
Psychology Bulletin, 28, 1379 –1387.
De Dreu, C. K. W., & van Knippenberg, D. (2005). The possessive self as
a barrier to conflict resolution: Effects of mere ownership, process
accountability, and self-concept clarity on competitive cognitions and
behavior. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 89, 345–357.
Denes-Raj, V., & Epstein, S. (1994). Conflict between intuitive and rational processing: When people behave against their better judgment.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 66, 819 – 829.
Ditto, P. H., & Lopez, D. F. (1992). Motivated skepticism: Use of differential decision criteria for preferred and nonpreferred conclusions. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 63, 568 –584.
Ditto, P. H., Scepansky, J. A., Munro, G. D., Apanovitch, A. M., &
Lockhart, L. K. (1998). Motivated sensitivity to preference-inconsistent
information. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 75, 53– 69.
Dodge, K. A., & Crick, N. R. (1990). Social information-processing biases
of aggressive behavior in children. Personality and Social Psychology
Bulletin, 16, 8 –22.
Dunegan, K. J. (1993). Framing, cognitive modes, and image theory:
Toward an understanding of a glass half full. Journal of Applied Psychology, 78, 491–503.
Edwards, K., & Smith, E. E. (1996). A disconfirmation bias in the evaluation of arguments. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 71,
5–24.

Festinger, L. (1957). A theory of cognitive dissonance. Stanford, CA:
Stanford University Press.
Festinger, L. (1964). Conflict, decision, and dissonance. Stanford, CA:
Stanford University Press.
Fiedler, K., Brinkmann, B., Betsch, T., & Wild, B. (2000). Sampling
approach to biases in conditional probability judgments: Beyond base
rate neglect and statistical format. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
General, 129, 399 – 418.
Fischer, P., Greitemeyer, T., & Frey, D. (2007). Ego-depletion and positive
illusions: Does the construction of positivity require regulatory resources? Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 33, 1306 –1321.
Fischer, P., Jonas, E., Frey, D., & Kastenmüller, A. (in press). Selective
exposure and decision framing: The impact of gain and loss framing on
confirmatory information search after decisions. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology.
Fischer, P., Jonas, E., Frey, D., & Schulz-Hardt, S. (2005). Selective
exposure to information: The impact of information limits. European
Journal of Social Psychology, 35, 469 – 492.
Fischer, P., Schulz-Hardt, S., & Frey, D. (in press). Selective exposure and
information quantity: How different information quantities moderate
decision makers’ preference for consistent and inconsistent information.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology.
Frey, D. (1981). The effect of negative feedback about oneself and cost of
information on preferences for information about the source of this
feedback. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 17, 42–50.
Frey, D. (1986). Recent research on selective exposure to information. In
L. Berkowitz (Ed.), Advances in experimental social psychology (Vol.
19, pp. 41– 80). New York: Academic Press.
Frey, D., & Stahlberg, D. (1986). Selection of information after receiving
more or less reliable self-threatening information. Personality and Social
Psychology Bulletin, 12, 434 – 441.
Gailliot, M. T., Baumeister, R. F., DeWall, C. N., Maner, J. K., Plant,
E. A., Tice, D. M. et al. (2006). Self-control relies on glucose as a
limited energy source: Willpower is more than a metaphor. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 91, 49 – 62.
Gilbert, D. T., Krull, D. S., & Pelham, B. W. (1988). Of thoughts unspoken: Social inference and the self-regulation of behavior. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 55, 685– 694.
Greitemeyer, T., & Schulz-Hardt, S. (2003). Preference-consistent evaluation of information in the hidden profile paradigm: Beyond group-level
explanations for the dominance of shared information in group decisions. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 84, 322–339.
Greitemeyer, T., Schulz-Hardt, S., Brodbeck, F., & Frey, D. (2006).
Information sampling and group decision making: The effects of an
advocacy procedure and task experience. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Applied, 12, 31– 42.
Holton, B., & Pyszczynski, T. (1989). Biased information search in the
interpersonal domain. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 15,
42–51.
Isbell, L., & Wyer, R. S. Jr. (1999). Correcting for mood-induced bias in
the evaluation of political candidates: The roles of intrinsic and extrinsic
motivation. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 25, 237–249.
Janis, I. L. (1982). Groupthink (2nd rev. ed.). Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
Johnston, L. (1996). Resisting change: Information-seeking and stereotype
change. European Journal of Social Psychology, 26, 799 – 825.
Jonas, E., Graupmann, V., & Frey, D. (2006). The influence of mood on the
search for supporting versus conflicting information. Personality and
Social Psychology Bulletin, 32, 3–15.
Jonas, E., Greenberg, J., & Frey, D. (2003). Connecting terror management
and dissonance theory: Evidence that mortality salience increases the
preference for supporting information after decisions. Personality and
Social Psychology Bulletin, 29, 1181–1189.
Jonas, E., Schulz-Hardt, S., Frey, D., & Thelen, N. (2001). Confirmation
bias in sequential information search after preliminary decisions: An

SELF-REGULATION AND SELECTIVE EXPOSURE
expansion of dissonance theoretical research on selective exposure to
information. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 80, 557–
571.
Kiesler, C. A. (1971). The psychology of commitment. New York: Academic Press.
Klayman, J., & Ha, Y. W. (1987). Confirmation, disconfirmation, and
information in hypothesis testing. Psychological Review, 94, 211–228.
Kray, L. J., & Galinsky, A. D. (2003). The debiasing effect of counterfactual mind-sets: Increasing the search for disconfirmatory information in
group decisions. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 36, 362–377.
Kruglanski, A. W., & Klar, Y. (1987). A view from a bridge: Synthesizing
the consistency and attribution paradigms from a lay epistemic perspective. European Journal of Social Psychology, 17, 211–241.
Lopes, L. L. (1987). Between hope and fear: The psychology of risk. In L.
Berkowitz (Ed.), Advances in experimental social psychology (Vol. 20,
pp. 255–295). New York: Academic Press.
Lundgren, S. R., & Prislin, R. (1998). Motivated cognitive processing and
attitude change. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 24, 715–
726.
Martijn, C., Tenbült, P., Merckelbach, H., Dreezens, E., & de Vries, N. K.
(2002). Getting a grip on ourselves: Challenging expectancies about
energy loss after self-control. Social Cognition, 20, 441– 460.
Muraven, M., & Baumeister, R. F. (2000). Self-regulation and depletion of
limited resources: Does self-control resemble a muscle? Psychological
Bulletin, 126, 247–259.
Muraven, M., Tice, D. M., & Baumeister, R. F. (1998). Self-control as
limited resource: Regulation depletion patterns. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 74, 774 –789.
Mussweiler, T. (2003). Comparison processes in social judgment: Mechanisms and consequences. Psychological Review, 110, 472– 489.
Paulhus, D., Graf, P., & Van Selst, M. (1989). Attentional load increases
the positivity of self-presentation. Social Cognition, 7, 389 – 400.
Petty, R. E., Wells, G. L., & Brock, T. C. (1976). Distraction can enhance
or reduce yielding to propaganda: Thought disruption versus effort
justification. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 34, 874 –
884.
Pinkley, R. L., Griffith, T. L., & Northcraft, G. B. (1995). “Fixed pie” a la
mode: Information availability, information processing, and the negotiation of suboptimal agreements. Organizational Behavior and Human
Decision Processes, 62, 101–112.
Pyszczynski, T., & Greenberg, J. (1987). Toward an integration of cognitive and motivational perspectives on social inference: A biased
hypothesis-testing model. In L. Berkowitz (Ed.), Advances in experimental social psychology (Vol. 20, pp. 297–340). New York: Academic
Press.

395

Schmeichel, J. S., Vohs, K. D., & Baumeister, R. F. (2003). Intellectual
performance and ego depletion: Role of the self in logical reasoning and
other information processing. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 85, 33– 46.
Schulz-Hardt, S., Frey, D., Lüthgens, C., & Moscovici, S. (2000). Biased
information search in group decision making. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 78, 655– 669.
Schwarz, N., Frey, D., & Kumpf, M. (1980). Interactive effects of writing
and reading a persuasive essay on attitude change and selective exposure. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 16, 1–17.
Snyder, M., & Swann, W. B. (1978). Behavioral confirmation in social
interaction: From social perception to social reality. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 14, 148 –162.
Steele, C. M., & Liu, T. J. (1983). Dissonance processes as selfaffirmation. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 45, 5–19.
Sweeney, P. D., & Gruber, K. L. (1984). Selective exposure: Voter information preferences and the Watergate affair. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 46, 1208 –1221.
Vohs, K. D., Baumeister, R. F., & Ciarocco, N. J. (2005). Self-regulation
and self-presentation: Regulatory resource depletion impairs impression
management and effortful self-presentation depletes regulatory resources. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 88, 632– 657.
Vohs, K. D., & Heatherton, T. F. (2000). Self-regulation failure: A
resource-depletion approach. Psychological Science, 11, 249 –254.
Wason, P. C., & Johnson-Laird, P. N. (1972). Psychology of reasoning:
Structure and content. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Watson, D., Clark, L. A., & Tellegen, A. (1988). Development and validation of brief measures of positive and negative affect: The PANAS
scales. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 54, 1063–1070.
Webb, T. L., & Sheeran, P. (2003). Can implementation intentions help to
overcome ego-depletion? Journal of Experimental Social Psychology,
39, 279 –286.
Wegner, D. M. (1994). Ironic processes of mental control. Psychological
Review, 101, 34 –52.
Wegner, D. M., Schneider, D. J., Carter, S. R., & White, T. L. (1987).
Paradoxical effects of thought suppression. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 53, 5–13.
Yzerbyt, V. Y., Coull, A., & Rocher, S. J. (1999). Fencing off the deviant:
The role of cognitive resources in the maintenance of stereotypes.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 77, 449 – 462.

Received April 4, 2006
Revision received July 31, 2007
Accepted September 4, 2007 䡲

