Journal of Personality and Social Psychology
2008, Vol. 94, No. 1, 91–107

Copyright 2008 by the American Psychological Association
0022-3514/08/$12.00 DOI: 10.1037/0022-3514.94.1.91

The Space Between Us:
Stereotype Threat and Distance in Interracial Contexts
Phillip Atiba Goff

Claude M. Steele

The Pennsylvania State University

Stanford University

Paul G. Davies
University of British Columbia, Okanagan
Four studies investigate the role that stereotype threat plays in producing racial distancing behavior in an
anticipated conversation paradigm. It was hypothesized that the threat of appearing racist may have the
ironic effect of causing Whites to distance themselves from Black conversation partners. In Study 1,
participants distanced themselves more from Black partners under conditions of threat, and this distance
correlated with the activation of a “White racist” stereotype. In Study 2, it was demonstrated that Whites’
interracial distancing behavior was not predicted by explicit or implicit prejudice. Study 3 provides
evidence that conceiving of interracial interactions as opportunities to learn may attenuate the negative
consequences of threat for Whites. Study 4 found that Whites have conscious access to their experience
of stereotype threat and that this awareness may mediate the relationship between threat and distance.
These results are discussed within a broader discourse of racial distancing and the possibility that certain
identity threats may be as important as prejudice in determining the outcomes of interracial interactions.
Keywords: stereotype threat, racial bias, racial discrimination, social distance, prejudice

(Allport, 1954). Yet we predict that this same prosocial concern
may contribute to racial distancing under conditions where an
egalitarian individual becomes concerned with being seen as prejudiced. There is some research to support this hypothesis.
A growing literature suggests that individuals are aware that
they may be negatively stereotyped as racially prejudiced (i.e.,
Dunton & Fazio, 1997; Plant & Devine, 1998; Vorauer, Main, &
O’Connell, 1998). For example, Vorauer and her colleagues have
demonstrated that White Canadians spontaneously frame interracial interactions in terms of how they may be stereotyped (Vorauer
et al., 1998; Vorauer, Hunter, Main, & Roy, 2000). In a series of
experiments examining the relationship between White Canadians
and indigenous Canadians, Vorauer and her colleagues demonstrated that White Canadians’ impressions of an interracial interaction and of their out-group partner were influenced by the degree
to which they felt they had been stereotyped as prejudiced
(Vorauer et al., 1998). Similarly, White Canadians expected to be
stereotyped as prejudiced when anticipating interactions with indigenous Canadians (Vorauer et al., 2000).
In line with these findings, the present research investigates the
possibility that for Whites, the fear of being stereotyped as racially
prejudiced by a Black conversation partner may lead individuals to
distance themselves from their partner. That is, the fear of being
labeled prejudiced could lead to racial distancing.

Much of contemporary research on racial prejudice and discrimination must contend with a paradox. Namely, in the last half
century, researchers have found a consistent decline in the expression of anti-Black racial attitudes and a similarly robust maintenance of Black–White racial inequality (Bobo, 1983). Many researchers have explained this paradox by assuming that
contaminated “hearts” or “minds” are the necessary precondition
for racial disparities. Each of these contemporary theories about
racial discrimination locates the problem of racial inequality
within individual agents and assumes that if there is racism, there
must be racists. The present research adopts a more contextual
approach to racial inequality and discrimination in order to explain
the paradox of diverging racial attitudes and outcomes.
Rather than assuming that contaminated “hearts and minds” are
solely responsible for racial discrimination, in the present research
we hypothesized that one’s concern with appearing prejudiced
might have the ironic and unintended consequence of causing
racial harms. Of note, research on intergroup contact has frequently assumed that making racially egalitarian values important
to an individual is a significant step toward prejudice reduction

Phillip Atiba Goff, Department of Psychology, The Pennsylvania State
University; Claude M. Steele, Department of Psychology, Stanford University; Paul G. Davies, Department of Psychology, University of British
Columbia, Okanagan, Kelowna, British Columbia, Canada.
We thank Larisa A. Heiphetz for her helpful comments on earlier
versions of this article.
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Phillip
Atiba Goff, Department of Psychology, The Pennsylvania State University,
441 Moore Building, University Park, PA 16802. E-mail:
philgoff@psu.edu

A Brief History of Racial Distancing
Psychologists began studying race relations by examining racially avoidant behaviors and attitudes (Samelson, 1978). This
so-called “race psychology” (Duckitt, 1992) focused research on
“racial preferences,” the ostensibly natural desire of individuals to
91

GOFF, STEELE, AND DAVIES

92

affiliate more with one race than another (Bogardus, 1925, 1938;
Samelson, 1978). Edward Bogardus, who helped pioneer this
research, measured racial preference through an index of avoidance attitudes and behaviors. Subsequent researchers, however,
disputed Bogardus’s claim that these racial preferences were natural or rational. Psychologists began to study the same outcomes,
now labeling them as prejudices, stereotyping, and discrimination
(Duckitt, 1992; Samelson, 1978). As psychologists made the shift
from race psychology to a psychology of prejudice and discrimination, avoidant behavior became a measure of racial antipathy.
Perhaps because the study of avoidance and the study of prejudice share a common birthplace, contemporary researchers do not
generally distinguish between the two concepts. Research on nonverbal discrimination (Dovidio, Kawakami, & Gaertner, 2002;
Word, Zanna, & Cooper, 1974), reactions to nonconscious stereotyping (Macrae, Bodenhausen, Milne, & Jetten, 1994), and aversive racism (Gaertner & Dovidio, 1986) have used physical avoidance alternately as evidence of prejudice and a measure of
discrimination. Consequently, distancing is often treated as if it
were interchangeable with group stereotyping, prejudice, and discrimination.
However, intergroup distancing may also stem from factors
other than prejudiced attitudes. In such contexts, group harms
could still be observed even when prejudiced attitudes are weak or
nonexistent. That is, to borrow a phrase from the sociologist
Bonilla-Silva (2003), there may be “racism without racists.”
Therefore, it may be important to analyze intergroup avoidance for
its own sake, apart from its use as a measure of prejudice. In the
present research, we hypothesize that the stereotype that Whites
are racist may contribute interracial distancing even absent interracial animosity. We use stereotype threat theory as a model for
this prediction (Steele, 1992).

A Stereotype Threat Approach
Stereotype threat is the sense of threat that can arise when one
knows that he or she can possibly be judged or treated negatively
on the basis of a negative stereotype about one’s group (Steele,
1992, 1997; Steele & Aronson, 1995). Though primarily applied to
the domains of academic achievement, stereotype threat has also
been applied to such domains as athletic performance (Stone,
Lynch, Sjomeling, & Darley, 1999) and women’s professional
aspirations (Davies, Spencer, Quinn, & Gerhardstein, 2002). Stereotype threat requires that an individual be highly identified with
a domain, that the individual believe he or she is being evaluated,
and that the self-concept be implicated in that evaluation (Steele &
Aronson, 1995). In the present research, it is hypothesized that
Whites may experience stereotype threat in interracial contexts on
the basis of a perception that they could be stereotyped as racist in
those contexts.
Research by Frantz and colleagues has provided evidence that
stereotype threat can have an ironic effect of increasing Whites’
implicit pro-White bias on an implicit association test (Frantz,
Cuddy, Burnett, Ray, & Hart, 2004). That is, under conditions
where White participants feared being stereotyped as racist, their
scores on an implicit association test showed an increased bias in
favor of Whites and against Blacks. And, although Richeson and
Shelton (2003) do not frame their research in terms of stereotype
threat, they have demonstrated a number of behavioral conse-

quences of Whites’ concern with being seen as prejudiced in
interracial interactions. Notably, these effects can be both negative—in particular, decrements in working memory (Richeson &
Shelton, 2003; see also Schmader & Johns, 2003)— or positive,
such as when highly prejudiced Whites are rewarded by Blacks for
making great efforts to correct for their racism (Shelton, Richeson,
Salvatore, & Trawalter, 2005). Still, little research has examined
the behavioral consequences of stereotype threat for Whites in
interracial interactions.
We hypothesized that Whites under stereotype threat in interracial contexts would distance themselves from anticipated interaction partners. It is important to note that this stereotype threat
approach to interracial distancing is distinct from the “hearts and
minds” approach. That is, because a stereotype threat account of
interracial interactions is definitionally a situationist account, we
do not expect that traitlike measures of prejudice— either external
or internal—will predict distancing effects. This prediction is a
departure from previous research suggesting that implicit prejudice
is responsible for nonverbal behaviors in interpersonal settings
(e.g., Dovidio, 2001; Dovidio et al., 2002). However, previous
research in this area has not simultaneously manipulated threat and
measured implicit prejudice. We propose that in cases where
Whites experience stereotype threat, this experience may overwhelm preexisting racial attitudes, rendering those attitudes devoid
of predictive power. That is, the importance of the situation may
trump the importance of individuals’ characteristics when predicting discrimination. This is not, of course, intended to deny the
importance of individual differences in prejudice. Rather, it is
meant to foreground the relatively underexplored role of situational factors in producing disparate racial outcomes.

Overview of Studies
Study 1 was designed to test the primary hypothesis: that racially tense conversations with Black partners would produce
stereotype threat among White participants and in turn would
produce physical distancing. Study 2 used the same paradigm to
test an alternative hypothesis of the findings in Study 1: that the
patterns of avoidance and stereotype activation were due not to
stereotype threat but rather to a general anxiety about potentially
tense conversations. Study 2 was also designed to replicate another
boundary condition of stereotype threat, namely that stereotype
threat occurs in conditions where the self is implicated by the
stereotype but not in conditions where the self is not implicated
(Steele, 1992, 1997; Steele & Aronson, 1995).
Study 3 was designed to test the hypothesis that shifting participants’ evaluative frameworks could reduce the experience of
stereotype threat. It was hypothesized that giving participants
learning goals would attenuate the negative consequences of stereotype threat by reducing the evaluative implications of
stereotype-confirming behavior. Finally, Study 4 was designed to
gauge participants’ conscious access to the experience of stereotype threat. It was hypothesized that Whites’ experience of stereotype threat in interracial interactions was a “hot” process and not
reducible to “cold” cognitive processes.

Study 1
Study 1 was designed to examine the effect of stereotype threat
on the preferred social distance of White participants in an ex-

THE SPACE BETWEEN US

pected interracial contact. The principal hypothesis was that when
the stereotype of racism was relevant to a potential interaction—
that is, when participants expected to discuss a threatening topic—
Whites would distance themselves from Black partners more than
White partners. Under such conditions, it was further hypothesized
that stereotype activation would positively correlate with the degree of avoidance.

Method
Participants and Design
Eighty-two White male undergraduates at Stanford University
participated in this study in exchange for either $10 or partial
course credit. Women were not included as participants in this
study. Previous research has shown that threat and anxiety influence mixed-gender proximity preferences differently than samegender proximity preferences (Ugwuegbu & Anusiem, 1982). Because “Blackness” is most commonly mentally represented by
“Black males” (Goff, Thomas, & Jackson, in press), it was reasoned that Black males would produce the strongest effects. Therefore, only men were recruited for ostensibly same-gender dyads.
This experiment took the form of a 2 (race of partners: Black vs.
White) ⫻ 2 (conversation topic: love and relationships vs. racial
profiling) between-subjects design. The chief dependent measures
were the physical distance participants put between themselves
and their conversation partners and the degree to which stereotypes
related to their racial identity were cognitively activated by the
experimental conditions.

Materials
Word-stem completion. We hypothesized that participants
who were talking about racial profiling would sit farther away
from Black partners the more threatened they felt. To measure
threat (and rule out the possibility that general White identity or
anxiety was driving the effect), we measured the activation of three
distinct concepts: White racial identity, negative stereotypes about
Whites as racist, and general social anxiety. To measure the
activation of these concepts, we used a word-stem completion task
similar to that employed in previous stereotype threat research
(e.g., Steele & Aronson, 1995). Ten words were chosen for each
category—White racial identity, negative stereotypes that Whites
are racist, and social anxiety—from pretests involving 157 Stanford undergraduates. In our pretest, 127 participants simply listed
words associated with one of the categories. The 25 most common
words for each category were then selected and given to 30
participants. These 30 participants rated each word for how
strongly related it was to its category. The 10 highest rated words
in each category were then selected as target words. All words are
listed in the Appendix. These target words were randomly intermixed with 60 filler words that could not be completed as words
that would fit any of the three category concepts, creating a sheet
of 90 total word stems.
For the purpose of analysis, the number of target words a
participant completed in each category was recorded. Of those
words, the number of target words the participant filled out in a
category-relevant manner (e.g., RACIST as opposed to RACKET)
was counted. Last, the number of target words filled out in a

93

category-relevant manner was divided by the total number of
target words the participant had completed. This ratio, then, is the
measure of concept activation.
Faces. To convey the race of the participants’ prospective
partners, we showed participants Polaroid pictures of their ostensible partners. Pictures of Black and White men were selected from
a data set of 20 Polaroids, each of which was rated on stereotypicality and attractiveness. Two Black faces and two White faces
were selected such that the Black faces were neither reliably more
attractive (M ⫽ 3.50) than the White faces (M ⫽ 3.46) nor reliably
more stereotypically Black (M ⫽ 4.57) than the White faces were
stereotypically White (M ⫽ 4.50).
Distancing measurement. The principal hypothesis was that
participants would sit farther away from Black partners than White
partners when participants felt under threat of confirming the
negative group stereotype. In order to measure this, we asked
participants to arrange three chairs— one for themselves and two
for their two prospective partners—so that the three of them could
have a “comfortable conversation.” Participants under the stereotype threat of possibly being seen as racist might put more distance
between their own chair and the chairs of their two partners when
they anticipate their partners are Black as a means of distancing
themselves from the interaction. However, another factor could
also affect the distance measure: a dispositional preference for
some level of distance between all three individuals involved.
If participants positioned themselves far away from their partners, then the configuration of chairs would look like there was an
odd person out (the isosceles triangle pictured in Configuration 1.1
in Figure 1). However, participants who were dispositionally more
comfortable with larger interpersonal distances might also create
distance between themselves and their partners. This configuration
would look quite different from one created by anxiety specific to
the partners and the situation and would look more like the
equilateral triangle pictured in Configuration 1.2 in Figure 1.
Therefore, to capture the first of these patterns—without the second—we developed a distance index in which the average distance
between the participant and his prospective conversation partners
(AB distance in Figure 1) was analyzed, covarying for the total
distance the participant put between all three chairs (ABC distance
in Figure 1). This calculation allows one to capture a participant’s
motivation to reduce possible tension, controlling for his individual proximity preferences. That is, by covarying for the total
distance between the three chairs, we were able to measure the
relative “odd-person-out” effect. Individuals who sat close to one
partner and far from the other would score similarly to someone
who sat equidistant from both partners. Likewise, individuals who
sat equally close to both partners but sat the partners far away from
each other would score lower than individuals who sat themselves
and their partners equidistant from each other. This odd-person-out
index gives an estimate of the degree to which the participant’s
chair placement reflected specifically a desire to distance himself
from the potential interaction partners.
It was hypothesized that participants expecting to talk with
Black partners about racial profiling would place their own chairs
farther away from the chairs of their partners than would participants in any of the other conditions. To further ensure that participants were sitting farther away from their partners rather than in
some other configuration (see Figure 1), we computed another
index in which Distance C was subtracted from the average of

94

GOFF, STEELE, AND DAVIES

Figure 1. Imagine that average distance between the participant and the partners is equal in Configuration 1.1
and Configuration 1.2. Only Configuration 1.1 indicates that the participant is distancing from the partners.

Distances A and B. If participants were distancing themselves
from their partners, then [(A ⫹ B)/2] – C would be positive. If
participants were sitting in some other configuration, then this
index would be 0 or negative.
In fact, participants who expected to speak with two Black
partners about racial profiling scored positively on this index
(M ⫽ 1.74), whereas those who anticipated speaking to Black
partners about love and relationships (M ⫽ –1.59) and those
who anticipated speaking to White partners about either
topic (racial profiling, M ⫽ – 0.55; love and relationships,
M ⫽ – 0.43) scored negatively. This suggests that participants
sat farther away from their partners in the Black/racial-profiling
condition and not in any other condition. As the distance
scores presented in Figure 2 show, this is precisely what was
observed.

Procedure
Participants were greeted by one of several White experimenters, who confirmed the participant’s name and informed
him that two other conversation partners had already arrived.
The experimenter, who was kept blind to condition,
then checked the participant’s name off a list of three names.
After administering the consent and demographic forms, the
experimenter took the participant’s picture with a Polaroid
instant camera and placed it between two other pictures, ostensibly of the two partners with whom the participant would later
have a conversation (no conversation would actually take
place). In the Black partner condition, both pictures were of
Black males. In the White partner condition, both pictures were
of White males.

THE SPACE BETWEEN US

95

Figure 2. Adjusted distance scores in Study 1. Values are means (and standard errors); F(1, 77) ⫽ 4.51, p ⬍
.05.

Cover story. Pretesting revealed that expecting to talk to two
Black males—probably in light of their limited numbers in the
student body—tended to arouse suspicion in our participants,
especially when they learned that the topic of conversation was
racially charged. To combat this suspicion, we told participants
that they were participating in an experiment on “diverse conversations” in which the gender and racial makeup of the groups were
manipulated to create diversity. Unfortunately, pretesting also revealed that White participants reported being threatened at the
mere mention of diverse conversations. In light of this finding, it
was expected that stereotype activation would not differ by condition.
Topic selection. Participants then chose a topic slip, without
looking, from a grab bag. In reality, all slips in the bag stated that
the conversation topic would be either racial profiling in the racial
profiling condition or love and relationships in the love and
relationships condition. Participants were then told that they would
be discussing the topic they had picked from the bag.
Distance measurement. After the topic was selected, participants were given a “cognitive engagement task”—in actuality, the
word-stem completion task— ostensibly to ensure that they were
taking the conversation and experiment seriously. Participants
were asked to complete the task as quickly as possible by finishing
each word stem with the first word that came to mind. After 6 min,
the word-stem completion sheet was collected, and participants
were escorted to the room where the conversation would purportedly take place. Upon arriving, the experimenter feigned frustration at the fact that the three chairs were lined up in the corner of
an otherwise featureless room. The experimenter apologized for
the inconvenience and then asked participants to set up the chairs
“so that the three of [them could] have a comfortable conversation” and instructed them to “take a seat” in one of the chairs after
they had arranged them. The experimenter then left the room,
ostensibly to retrieve the other two partners for the conversation.
After 1 min, the experimenter returned to the room, probed the

participants for suspicions, thoroughly debriefed them, and
thanked them for their participation.

Results
Distance Findings
The data were submitted to a 2 ⫻ 2 analysis of covariance
(ANCOVA) with AB distance as the dependent variable, race of
partner and conversation topic as the predictors, and ABC distance
as the covariate. Average distance between all three chairs (the
ABC distance) was a significant covariate in the analysis, F(1,
77) ⫽ 1,695.61, p ⬍ .001, ␩2 ⫽ .96, and was equally correlated
with AB distance in all conditions. The 2 ⫻ 2 ANCOVA further
revealed a reliable interaction on the distance score, F(1, 77) ⫽
4.51, p ⬍ .05, ␩2 ⫽ .06. Simple effects tests revealed that participants sat farther away from their prospective Black partners when
they believed they would discuss racial profiling (M ⫽ 38.53) than
when they believed they would discuss love and relationships
(M ⫽ 37.48), F(1, 77) ⫽ 6.75, p ⫽ .01, ␩2 ⫽ .08, and that
participants who believed they would discuss racial profiling sat
farther away from the prospective Black partners (M ⫽ 38.53) than
from the prospective White partners (M ⫽ 37.71), F(1, 77) ⫽ 4.56,
p ⬍ .05, ␩2 ⫽ .06. See Figure 2.

The Role of Stereotypes
Three independent pairwise correlations found that responses to
the words reflecting general White identity, words reflecting a
White racist stereotype, and words reflecting a general social
anxiety were not correlated experiment-wide or within any cell of
the design, all rs(82) ⬍ .20, ns. This suggests that the word
completion measures tapped three distinct concepts. Additionally,
no main effects or interactions were found, all Fs(1, 77) ⬍ 1.50,
ns, for any of the measures. This is likely because our cover story

GOFF, STEELE, AND DAVIES

96

made the stereotype of the White racist salient across all conditions.
Separate within-cell partial correlations were then conducted
between each of our three word-stem categories and the adjusted
AB measure. The only significant partial correlation was between
AB distance and the activation of words associated with White
racism in the Black-partner/racial-profiling condition, r(19) ⫽ .43,
p ⫽ .05. In this condition, the more that words associated with
White racism were activated, the farther participants placed their
chairs from Black participants.
Next, a regression analysis was conducted to test whether the
relationship between stereotype activation and distance was significantly different in the Black/racial-profiling condition than in
all other conditions. In order to perform this test, we created
contrast weights for the Black/racial-profiling cell and the other
three cells (3, –1, –1, –1). The regression on AB distance, then,
included these contrast weights, stereotype activation, and the
interaction between the two as predictors, using ABC distance as
a covariate. The regression revealed that the relationship between
activating the White racist stereotype and participants’ AB distance was significantly stronger in the Black/racial-profiling condition than in all other conditions, B ⫽ .69, t(77) ⫽ 2.03, p ⬍ .05,
␩2 ⫽ .05. This suggests that participants’ AB distance was
uniquely moderated by worry about being perceived as racist in the
Black/racial-profiling condition.

Discussion
In support of the primary hypothesis, participants who were
assigned to discuss racial profiling with two Black partners distanced their partners more than did participants in any other
condition. In addition, activation of the White racist stereotype
remained constant across conditions and was related to distance
only for participants who anticipated talking with two Black partners about racial profiling. In this condition, there was a significant
correlation between activation of the stereotype and distance such
that the more participants activated the stereotype of the White
racist, the farther they sat from their anticipated partners. Of note,
stereotype activation and distance were related only under conditions of threat. This provides initial support that stereotype threat
is an appropriate lens through which to interpret these findings.
Though these results are consistent with a stereotype threat
approach, there is no direct evidence that this pattern is due to a
threat to the self. One might argue that a White individual talking
with two Black partners about racial profiling does not experience
stereotype threat but rather may simply fear that the conversation
may become tense or contentious. The resultant aversion to the
situation, manifested through increased distance, might therefore
reflect an attempt to reduce the contentiousness of the conversation
rather than reflecting any threat to the self.
Additionally, because Study 1 did not include any measurements of prejudice, the role of implicit or explicit prejudice remained unexplored. Though the random assignment of participants
to conditions means it is statistically improbable that the observed
pattern of data was due entirely to participants’ levels of internal
prejudice, the degree to which internal prejudice could moderate
these effect is an important issue to examine. Therefore, Study 2
was designed to test the hypothesis that the self must be threatened

in order to produce the observed distancing behavior and that
prejudice has little role in producing distance in this context.

Study 2
The first goal of Study 2 was to test directly the hypothesis that
the pattern of distance observed in Study 1 resulted from threats to
the self. It was again hypothesized that stereotype activation and
distance would be related only when participants felt threatened.
To test these hypotheses we dropped the love and relationships
topic, and racial profiling became the only topic assigned in all
conditions. One condition, therefore, was a replication of the racial
profiling condition from Study 1. In addition, a condition was
added where participants were given instructions immediately
before being led to the conversation room (i.e., immediately after
completing the word-stem task). The experimenter informed participants that they would be assigned an opinion, be asked to read
it aloud, and argue from that perspective during the conversation.
Participants were informed that their partners would be explicitly
told that the opinions read and argued were assigned and not those
of the participant.
The language of the opinion was taken from a focus group
session where White undergraduates were asked to report the types
of arguments they might adopt that would create the largest degree
of racial tension with Black students on the topic of racial profiling. Stanford undergraduates rated this opinion as a pro-racialprofiling stance in pretesting.
Having students read this pro-racial-profiling position allowed
for a strong test of our hypothesis. If participants were simply
afraid of taking potentially racist perspectives and, thus, causing
contention, being forced to read the opinion might make them all
the more likely to sit far away from their prospective Black
partners. Therefore, if participants sat equally close to Black and
White prospective partners, it would not be because they had been
supplied with a position that either was easy to defend or itself
defused the racial tensions in the situation.
To test the hypothesis that internal prejudices, either explicit or
implicit, were not predictive of distance, we had participants
complete measures of prejudice before arriving for the anticipated
conversation. This allowed for the possible moderating effects of
prejudice to be examined.
The principal hypothesis of Study 2 was that participants would
distance themselves from Black partners more than from White
partners when voicing their own opinion but not when reading an
assigned opinion. As in Study 1, it was further hypothesized that
stereotype activation would positively correlate with distance only
under conditions of stereotype threat. Last, it was hypothesized
that stable prejudice (both explicit and implicit) would have little
if any influence on distance and would not attenuate the relationship between stereotype activation and distance.

Method
Participants and Design
Forty-seven White male undergraduates at Stanford University
participated in this study in exchange for either $20 or partial
course credit. This experiment took the form of a 2 (race of
partners: Black vs. White) ⫻ 2 (choice condition: free choice vs.

THE SPACE BETWEEN US

forced choice) between-subjects design. The chief dependent measures were, again, distance score and the degree to which stereotypes were activated by the experimental conditions.

Distance Measure
The data analysis procedure for distance results was identical to
that used in Study 1. Again, only participants in the Black/freechoice condition had positive [(A ⫹ B)/2] – C scores (M ⫽ 2.89).
Participants in all other conditions scored negatively (Black/
forced-choice, M ⫽ –1.76; White/free-choice, M ⫽ –2.90; White/
forced-choice, M ⫽ –1.62).

Materials
A standard Black–White valence Implicit Association Test
(IAT; Greenwald, McGhee, & Schwartz, 1998) was used to measure implicit prejudice. This IAT consists of three practice blocks
followed by critical trial blocks pairing either Black male and
female faces with negatively valenced words and White male and
female faces with positively valenced words or vice versa.

Procedure
To measure explicit and implicit prejudice, we recruited participants for a two-part study. In the first part, participants completed
the IAT, the Modern Racism Scale (MRS; McConahay, 1986), the
Motivation to Control Prejudice Scale (MCP; Dunton & Fazio,
1997), and the Interethnic Anxiety Toward African Americans
Scale (IATAA; Britt, Boniecki, Vescio, Biernat, & Brown, 1996).
Consistent with the cover story, participants also filled out several
filler surveys. After completing these measures, participants were

97

told that they would be randomly assigned to one of several
studies, some of which were related to the surveys they had just
completed, and some of which were not. They were then scheduled
for their next session and thanked for their participation. They
were not paid or given credit until they had completed the second
task. All participants completed both portions of the study.
For the second part of the study, a new team of White experimenters was trained to administer the experiment. These experimenters had no knowledge of Study 1 and were, again, blind to
hypotheses. Photos of the prospective participants, the word-stem
completion task, the room, and the chairs were identical to those
used in Study 1. Finally, participants were probed for suspicions
about the study, thoroughly debriefed, and thanked for their participation.

Results
Distance Findings
A 2 (race of partner: Black vs. White) ⫻ 2 (choice condition:
free choice vs. forced choice) ANCOVA was conducted on AB
distance with ABC distance as the covariate. This analysis revealed a marginal main effect of both race of partner, F(1, 42) ⫽
3.34, p ⫽ .08, ␩2 ⫽ .07, and opinion condition, F(1, 42) ⫽ 3.51,
p ⫽ .07, ␩2 ⫽ .08. These main effects were qualified by the
predicted interaction, as shown in Figure 3, F(1, 42) ⫽ 10.26, p ⬍
.01, ␩2 ⫽ .20. A simple effects test showed that in the free-choice
condition, participants sat farther from prospective Black partners
(M ⫽ 37.50) than from prospective White partners (M ⫽ 34.74),
replicating the findings of Study 1, F(1, 42) ⫽ 6.17, p ⬍ .05, ␩2 ⫽
.13. A simple effects test also showed that participants sat signif-

Figure 3. Adjusted distance scores in Study 2. Values are means (and standard errors); F(1, 42) ⫽ 10.26, p ⬍
.005.

98

GOFF, STEELE, AND DAVIES

icantly closer to prospective Black partners in the forced-choice
condition (M ⫽ 34.70) than in the free-choice condition (M ⫽
37.50), F(1, 42) ⫽ 4.25, p ⬍ .05, ␩2 ⫽ .09. Of note, participants
did not differ significantly in their distancing from prospective
Black (M ⫽ 34.70) or White partners (M ⫽ 35.55) in the forcedchoice condition and, if anything, sat closer to prospective Black
partners than White partners, F(1, 42) ⫽ 2.35, p ⬎ .10, ␩2 ⫽ .05.
This confirmed the first hypothesis, that by making the prospective
interaction essentially nondiagnostic of an individual’s level of
racism, ambient threat could be eliminated.

The Role of Stereotypes
Again, the only significant correlation was between AB distance
and the White racist stereotype in the Black free-choice cell,
r(8) ⫽ .84, p ⬍ .01. Means and correlations paralleled findings in
Study 1. No other correlations approached significance. Of note,
the correlation between AB distance and the White racist stereotype was negligible in the Black/forced-choice cell, r(9) ⫽ .04, ns.
This finding serves as both a replication of Study 1 and support for
the hypothesis that stereotypes about White racists influenced
behavior toward prospective Black partners only when participants’ identities as nonracist were threatened by the situation.
To test whether activation of the White racist stereotype moderated the relationship between a participant’s condition and distancing, we created contrast weights for the Black/free-choice cell
and the other three cells (3, –1, –1, –1). We then conducted a
regression on AB distance with these contrast weights, stereotype
activation, and the interaction between the two as predictors, with
ABC distance included as a covariate. The regression revealed that
stereotype activation did, in fact, moderate the relationship between participants’ condition and distance, yielding a significant
interaction between stereotype activation and the contrast weights
on AB distance, B ⫽ 1.38, t(42) ⫽ 2.16, p ⬍ .05, ␩2 ⫽ .10. This
will be referred to as the moderation regression for the purpose of
subsequent analyses.

The Role of Prejudice
To test the hypothesis that prejudice is not required to create
interpersonal discrimination, we conducted within-cell, by condition, and overall partial correlations between AB distance and
MRS scores, IAT scores, and MCP scores (controlling for ABC
distance). None of these correlations approached significance (all
rs ⬍ .33, ns). Additionally, including prejudice scores as a covariate in the moderation regression did not reduce the influence of
stereotype activation in the moderation regression, B ⫽ 1.39,
t(41) ⫽ 2.14, p ⬍ .05, ␩2 ⫽ .10.

The Role of Interethnic Anxiety
Within-cell, by condition, and overall partial correlations were
conducted between IATAA scores and AB distance, with ABC
distance as the covariate. This revealed one reliable partial correlation, such that for participants interacting with Black partners,
IATAA scores were positively correlated with AB distance,
r(20) ⫽ .43, p ⬍ .05. However, this was not the case for participants interacting with White partners, r(21) ⫽ –.03, ns. This
finding suggests that interethnic anxiety was predictive of distance

between White participants and their prospective Black partners
but not between participants and their White partners.
The influence of interethnic anxiety was further investigated by
conducting a regression analysis on AB distance, including
IATAA, race of partner, and the interaction between these terms as
predictor variables, and ABC distance as a covariate. This regression revealed a marginal effect of partner’s race, B ⫽ 3.59, t(42) ⫽
1.90, p ⫽ .06, ␩2 ⫽ .08, and a significant effect of IATAA, B ⫽
1.20, t(42) ⫽ 2.62, p ⫽ .01, ␩2 ⫽ .14. These main effects were
qualified by a significant Race ⫻ Interethnic Anxiety interaction,
B ⫽ –1.32, t(42) ⫽ –2.40, p ⬍ .05, ␩2 ⫽ .12. This finding suggests
that interethnic anxiety was predictive of distance between White
participants and their prospective Black partners but not their
prospective White partners.
Last, to test whether level of interethnic anxiety attenuated the
threat findings, we conducted the threat moderation regression on
AB distance, with the contrast weights, stereotype activation, and
the interaction between the two as predictors, and ABC distance
and IATAA included as covariates. This still produced a reliable
effect of the interaction term in the moderation regression, B ⫽
1.31, t(41) ⫽ 1.99, p ⬍ .05, ␩2 ⫽ .09. When the findings were
taken together, it was concluded that although interethnic anxiety
is predictive of distance from Blacks, it does not attenuate the
impact of stereotype threat on distancing behavior.

Discussion
Study 2 demonstrated that the results of Study 1 were not due
only to participants’ reluctance to engage in potentially uncomfortable conversations, and that internal prejudice played little if
any role in the observed findings. By directly testing the hypothesis that threats to the self are a necessary part of a stereotype
threat phenomenon, in Study 2 we sought to replicate and extend
the findings of Study 1. In Study 2, stereotype threat produced a
pattern of data such that White participants sat farther away from
Black partners than from White partners when discussing racial
profiling. Additionally, stereotype activation was related to distance only when participants expected to discuss racial profiling
with Black partners. However, when participants were assigned an
opinion and their selves were “removed” from the situation, there
was no difference in the degree to which they distanced themselves
from their Black or White participants, nor was there a relationship
between stereotype activation and distance. Stereotype activation
was related to distance only when participants experienced a threat
to the self, which supports a stereotype threat interpretation of the
data.
In addition, neither explicit prejudice, as measured by the MRS,
nor implicit prejudice, as measured by the IAT, predicted distance
in any condition. Nor did either measure of prejudice moderate the
relationship between stereotype threat and distance. Beyond supporting the initial hypothesis that situational threats play a more
important role than internal prejudices in predicting behavior it
appears that internal prejudices played virtually no role in predicting behavior under conditions of stereotype threat.
Surprisingly, participants’ scores on the MCP did not predict
distancing behavior. One would imagine that those who are most
motivated to control the expression of racial prejudice would be
the most identified with an antiracist identity and, therefore, be
most threatened by the possibility of being seen as racist. How-

THE SPACE BETWEEN US

ever, there is some evidence to suggest that those who are most
identified with being seen as nonprejudiced are also least likely to
see threats to the self in interracial contexts. Plant (2004), for
instance, found that Whites who were high in motivation to control
prejudice also had more positive expectations of interracial interactions when no additional threat was introduced. If that were true
of participants in Study 2, then they may have been motivated to
expect a positive interaction at the same time that a negative one
would be most threatening to their self-concept. Similarly, Vorauer
and Ross have demonstrated that those who were most invested in
positive intergroup interactions imagined that they were most
transparent to an out-group partner (Vorauer & Ross, 1999). This
feeling that their true, nonracist self was visible impaired their
ability to accurately judge their own behavior.
Though participants’ motivation to control prejudice was not
predictive, the measure of interethnic anxiety was predictive of
distance under conditions of stereotype threat, suggesting that
general anxiety did contribute to distancing behavior. This finding
is consistent with previous literature that suggests that stereotype
threat produces increased anxiety whether that anxiety is measured
via nonverbal expression (Bosson, Haymovitz, & Pinel, 2004),
blood pressure (Blascovich, Spencer, Quinn, & Steele, 2001), or
social facilitation (O’Brien & Crandall, 2003). No factors were
found to attenuate the relationship between stereotype activation
and distancing behavior.

99

negatively evaluated (either doing poorly on a math test or being
seen as racist) with an entitative evaluative framework would
result in a strong threat to one’s self-concept. If, on the other hand,
one has an incremental theory of the stereotyped domain, then it is
less likely that a negative evaluation would be threatening to one’s
sense of self. Study 3, therefore, tested the hypothesis that when
Whites frame interracial contact in terms of an incremental theory,
stereotype threat is eliminated.
The primary hypotheses of Study 3 were, first, that in the
absence of learning goals, participants would sit farther away from
Black partners than from White partners. This was not expected to
be the case in the presence of learning goals. Second, as in Studies
1 and 2, it was hypothesized that stereotype activation would be
positively correlated with distance under conditions of stereotype
threat and, as in Study 2, that no other measurements of prejudice
or identity would moderate this relationship.
Having already examined the relationship between explicit and
implicit prejudice on distance, we included a measure of Black
stereotype activation. This was intended to rule out the possibility
that whereas stable prejudices might not predict differences in
participants’ distance scores, context-specific activation of negative Black stereotypes would.

Method
Participants and Design

Study 3
Work by Dweck and her colleagues suggests that if ability is
conceptualized as an entity (i.e., one simply has it or does not),
then poor performance can be seen as an indication that one is
inadequate within that domain (Dweck, 1996; Hong, Chiu, &
Dweck, 1995). Such a framework is called an implicit entity theory
of the domain. However, if ability is conceptualized as learnable
and protean, then it stands to reason that doing poorly on a test
would not serve as stereotype confirming evidence (Hong, Chiu, &
Dweck, 1995). Such a framework is called an implicit incremental
theory of the domain. Although the work of Dweck and her
colleagues has been shown to have effects on academic perseverance (Dweck, 1996; Hong et al., 1995), a shift in evaluative
framework has not yet been proven to reduce stereotype threat in
an experimental setting.
However, Vorauer and Turpie (2004) did find evidence that
increased evaluative concerns can lead low-prejudiced dominant
group members to react negatively toward stigmatized out-groups.
Across three studies, Vorauer and Turpie found that when dominant group members were concerned with being evaluated in terms
of their privileged social position, it created a “choking” effect for
those who were identified with being nonprejudiced. Vorauer and
Turpie discussed these results in terms of intergroup contact and
did not measure stereotype activation. Therefore, although their
findings are consistent with stereotype threat, a direct application
of the theory to these contexts has yet to be attempted.
Study 3 was designed to test the hypothesis that a shift in
evaluative framework might eliminate the negative consequences
of stereotype threat—in this case, within interracial situations. Our
rationale was that just as women taking a math test might assume
that ability is entitative, so too might Whites in an interracial
conversation believe that racial sensitivity is entitative. Being

Seventy-four White male undergraduates at Stanford University
participated in this study in exchange for either $20 or partial
course credit. This experiment took the form of a 2 (race of
partners: Black vs. White) ⫻ 2 (learning goals: present vs. absent)
between-subjects design. The chief dependent measures were,
again, the distance participants placed between their own chair and
the chairs of their conversation partners and the degree to which
concerns and stereotypes related to their racial identity were cognitively activated by the experimental conditions.

Materials
Incremental-theory/learning-goals manipulation. Dweck and
her colleagues have argued that adopting learning goals within a
domain is tantamount to having an incremental theory of that
domain. Therefore, it was hypothesized that inducing participants
to adopt learning goals would lead them to adopt incremental
theories in the domain of interracial contact.
The learning goals manipulation was a set of instructions that
included materials from studies previously conducted by Dweck
and her colleagues (Chiu, Hong, & Dweck, 1997; Dweck, 1996;
Hong et al., 1995). After completing the word-stem completion
task, participants were read our learning goals instructions. Pretests confirmed that these instructions increased learning goals and
decreased performance goals in interracial situations.
Learning goals measurement. To measure the effect of our
manipulation, we administered a learning-goals/performancegoals scale after participants had set up the chairs and before they
were debriefed (Button, Mathieu, & Zajac, 1996).
Black stereotypes. The substitution of Black stereotypes for
words associated with (nonracist) Whites in general allowed a test
of the hypothesis that participants were activating negative stereo-

GOFF, STEELE, AND DAVIES

100

types about their conversation partners without changing the proportion of target words to neutral words in the word-stem completion task.

Procedure
The procedure in Study 3 was nearly identical to that of Study
2. Participants were scheduled for two sessions not less than 24 hr
apart. During Session 1, they completed the IAT, MRS, MCP,
IATAA, and Rosenberg’s (1965) Self-Esteem Scale. They also
indicated their political affiliation. In order to perform a stronger
test of the hypothesis regarding explicit prejudice, we also included a second measure of explicit prejudice, the Attitudes Towards Blacks Scale (Brigham, 1993).
During Session 2, participants were shown pictures of their
conversation partners (Black vs. White) and filled out the wordstem completion task (with Black stereotypes instead of the general White words used in Studies 1 and 2). Half of the participants
were then given the learning goals instructions, whereas the other
half received no instructions. All participants were told they would
discuss racial profiling with their partners.
After receiving either the learning goals instructions or no
instructions, participants were told to set up the chairs as per
Studies 1 and 2. Feigning forgetfulness, the experimenter then
returned to the room and handed them the learning-goals/performance-goals scale. Finally, participants were probed for suspicions, thoroughly debriefed, and thanked for their participation.
Though Studies 1 and 2 were conducted by a different set of
experimenters, it was important to rule out the possibility that
experimenter expectancies contributed to our effects. Therefore, a
new group of experimenters was trained for Study 3. Then, midway through the study, yet another group of experimenters was
trained to complete data collection. Whereas the experimenters for
Studies 1 and 2 were both male and female, the experimenters for
the first half of Study 3 were all female, and the experimenters for
the second half were all male. By switching experimenters and
substituting male for female experimenters, we reduced the likelihood that either experimenter expectancies or experimenter gender contributed to the observed findings.

Results
Manipulation Check
To confirm that the participants’ learning and performance goals
had been significantly affected by the manipulations, we compared
these goals between conditions. Both goal orientations were, again,
measured at the end of the experiment, immediately before debriefing. As revealed by t tests, learning goals were significantly
higher in the learning goals condition (M ⫽ 5.95) than in the no
learning goals condition (M ⫽ 5.33), t(72) ⫽ 4.15, p ⬍ .001, ␩2 ⫽
.19. Conversely, performance goals were significantly lower in the
learning goals condition (M ⫽ 4.98) than in the no learning goals
condition (M ⫽ 5.41), t(72) ⫽ 2.61, p ⫽ .01, ␩2 ⫽ .09. Thus, it
was concluded that the instruction manipulation was effective.

Distance Findings
The same analytic strategy as in Studies 1 and 2 was used.
Again, only participants in the Black/no-learning-goals condition

had positive [(A ⫹ B)/2] – C scores (M ⫽ 2.93). Participants in all
other conditions scored negatively (Black/learning goals, M ⫽
– 0.48; White/no learning goals, M ⫽ –1.01; White/learning goals,
M ⫽ – 0.10).
Next a 2 ⫻ 2 ANCOVA was conducted with race of partners
and instruction condition as the independent variables, AB distance as the dependent variable, and ABC distance as the covariate. The analysis produced a main effect of race, with participants
sitting farther away from Blacks (M ⫽ 38.00) than Whites (M ⫽
37.34), F(1, 69) ⫽ 4.71, p ⬍ .05, ␩2 ⫽ .06. However, this main
effect was qualified by the predicted interaction, F(1, 69) ⫽ 4.09,
p ⬍ .05, ␩2 ⫽ .06.
Simple effects tests further confirmed the hypotheses. Participants sat farther away from Blacks (M ⫽ 38.58) than Whites (M ⫽
37.25) in the no learning goals condition, F(1, 69) ⫽ 9.47, p ⬍ .01,
␩2 ⫽ .12. This was not the case in the learning goals condition,
F(1, 69) ⬍ 0.001, ns. In fact, a simple effects test revealed that
participants with learning goals sat closer to Black partners (M ⫽
37.42) than did participants without learning goals (M ⫽ 38.58),
F(1, 69) ⫽ 8.03, p ⬍ .01, ␩2 ⫽ .10. This confirmed the hypothesis
that adopting a learning goals perspective protected individuals
from stereotype threat.

The Role of Stereotypes
Similarly to Studies 1 and 2, the Black/no-learning-goals condition and all other conditions were dummy coded (3, –1, –1, –1)
to create three-against-one contrast weights. Next, a regression on
AB distance was conducted with stereotype activation, the contrast
weights, and the interaction of the two as the predictor variables,
and ABC distance as the covariate. This analysis revealed a significant main effect of threat, B ⫽ 1.89, t(69) ⫽ 2.19, p ⬍ .05,
␩2 ⫽ .06. This main effect, however, was qualified by the predicted interaction, B ⫽ 0.91, t(69) ⫽ 1.97, p ⫽ .05, ␩2 ⫽ .05. This
finding confirms the hypothesis that activation of the White racist
stereotype moderated the relationship between participants’ condition and distance.

The Role of Internal Prejudices
As with Study 2, internal prejudices— both expressed and implicitly held— did not predict distancing behaviors or attenuate the
relationship between stereotype activation and stereotype threat.
Similarly, participant MCP scores and Black stereotype activation
lacked predictive power, all rs ⬍ .35, ns; B ⫽ 0.91, t(68) ⫽ 1.97,
p ⫽ .05, ␩2 ⫽ .05, and using scores on the Attitudes Towards
Blacks Scale as covariates in the moderation regression did not
reduce the influence of stereotype activation on distance, B ⫽ 0.96,
t(68) ⫽ 2.10, p ⬍ .05, ␩2 ⫽ .06. This again supports the hypothesis
that stereotype activation influences distance over and above stable
measures of prejudice.

The Role of Interethnic Anxiety
To test the relationship between interethnic anxiety and distance, we conducted within-cell, by condition, and overall partial
correlations between AB distance and IATAA scores, with ABC
distance as the covariate. This produced a positive correlation in
the Black condition, r(34) ⫽ .43, p ⬍ .01, such that high IATAA

THE SPACE BETWEEN US

scores corresponded to increased distancing from Black partners.
A Fisher’s Z test revealed that this correlation also deviated significantly from that observed in the White condition (Z ⫽ 2.80,
p ⬍ .01).
To test whether this relationship attenuated the role of stereotype activation in predicting distance, we performed the moderation regression on AB distance, adding IATAA scores as a second
covariate. The regression therefore included the contrast weights,
stereotype activation, and the interaction of these two terms as
predictor variables, and ABC distance and IATAA scores as the
covariates. This analysis again produced a reliable effect of the
interaction term on AB distance in the moderation regression, B ⫽
0.96, t(68) ⫽ 1.97, p ⫽ .05, ␩2 ⫽ .05. This serves as a replication
of Study 2, where interethnic anxiety predicted distancing from
Blacks across condition but did not moderate the role of stereotype
threat on distancing behavior.

Discussion
Study 3 replicated the results of Studies 1 and 2 with regard to
distance and the role of stereotype activation on distancing behavior. Study 3 also found support for the hypothesis that shifting the
evaluative framework from entitative to incremental can reduce
the impact of stereotype threat. There was no evidence that internal
prejudice (either explicit or implicit), Black stereotype activation,
or motivation to control prejudice contributed to or attenuated the
principal findings. Post hoc analyses did find that several factors
contributed to participant distance scores. Interethnic anxiety was
predictive of participant distance scores. However, none of these
factors attenuated the relationship between stereotype activation
and distance, suggesting that a stereotype threat framework is still
an appropriate one.
The robust nature of the principal distance and stereotype activation findings having been demonstrated, there remained a number of outstanding questions. First, the degree to which participants
have conscious access to their experience of stereotype threat
remained to be tested. Second, Studies 1–3 used a paradigm
wherein participants either were in racially heterogeneous groups
or had lone in-group status. Although this allowed us to covary out
individual differences in proximity preference, it introduced the
possibility that observed differences in distance were due in part to
participants’ “two on one” status. Last, Studies 1–3 did not incorporate any real interaction between participants and partners.
Study 4 was designed to assess whether participants had conscious
access to stereotype threat, to assess whether their solo status
contributed to the observed distance findings, and to test the
phenomenon’s viability when participants actually met their interaction partner.

Study 4
There were three goals in Study 4. The first was to explore the
hypothesis that stereotype threat is consciously accessible. The
second was to eliminate the hypothesis that the observed pattern of
distance scores in Studies 1–3 was due primarily to a “solo” effect
rather than to stereotype threat. The third was to ensure that the
findings observed in Studies 1–3 generalized when participants
met the conversation partner. To rule out the possibility that the
pattern of distance scores observed in Studies 1–3 was due entirely

101

to any solo effects, we told participants in Study 4 that they would
converse with only one partner, rather than two. This partner was
the same Black confederate in all conditions, who participants met
shortly before completing the primary dependent variable measures. In order not to arouse suspicion prior to participants’ completing self-report measures asking about their experiences regarding stereotype threat, Study 4 was, like Study 1, a one-session
study.

Method
Participants and Design
Fifty-five White male undergraduates at Stanford University
participated in this study in exchange for either $20 or partial
course credit. This experiment took the form of a 2 (conversation
topic: love and relationships vs. racial profiling) ⫻ 2 (learning
goals: present vs. absent) between-subjects design. Because participants anticipated a conversation with only one partner, there
was no covariate in the data analysis. Therefore, unadjusted mean
distance between the two chairs was the primary dependent variable. After moving their chair, participants were given a thoughtlisting task and, after this, an explicit stereotype threat scale.

Materials
Thought-listing task. The thought-listing task was adapted
from Vohs and Schmeichel (2003). It measured the degree to
which participants spontaneously generated stereotype-threatrelated thoughts during their initial encounter. This allowed for a
strong test of the hypothesis that stereotype threat occurs spontaneously and at the level of conscious awareness in certain interracial situations. Coders read each participant’s thought-listing
task and coded each participant as either a 1 (if he had listed at
least one stereotype-relevant thought) or 0 (if he had listed no
stereotype-relevant thoughts). A stereotype-threat-relevant thought
listing was defined as “any expression of anxiety due to the racial
dynamic in the situation.”
There was 100% agreement between coders, who each read all
responses. Examples of stereotype-threat-relevant thoughts are
given in the Results section.
Explicit Stereotype Threat Scale (ESTS). The ESTS was
adapted from work by Marx and Goff (2005). The scale was
originally designed to measure Blacks’ subjective experience of
stereotype threat in academic domains. Marx and Goff’s research
found that Blacks seemed to have relative awareness of their
experience of stereotype threat (reporting higher levels of stereotype threat in conditions where stereotype threat was observed). In
the present research, the scale was rewritten to correspond to the
stereotype about Whites and racism. The five items were “I worry
that my conversation partner might stereotype me as racist because
I am White”;“I worry that something I say might be misinterpreted
as prejudiced by my conversation partner”; “I never worry that
someone will suspect me of being prejudiced just because I am
White”; “I worry that my conversation partner’s evaluations of me
might be affected by my race”; and “I worry that, because I know
the racial stereotype about Whites and prejudice, my anxiety about
confirming that stereotype will negatively influence our interaction.”

102

GOFF, STEELE, AND DAVIES

Participants rated their agreement with the statements on a scale
from 1 (strongly disagree) to 7 (strongly agree). Items were then
averaged (with the third item reverse-scored). A factor analysis
revealed that there was only one factor with an eigenvalue above
1 (3.17) and that this factor accounted for 63% of the total variance
in the scale. The scale was also highly reliable, revealing an alpha
of .85.

Procedure
Though the overall paradigm was similar to Studies 1–3, there
were some noteworthy changes. Participants arrived at the experiment and received the same cover story as in Studies 1–3, namely,
that they would be participating in a “conversation study.” They
were then told to complete a demographic questionnaire prior to
the other participant’s arrival. The confederate arrived shortly after
the participant and asked whether there was time before the study
began to go to the bathroom. The experimenter asked the confederate to wait until the topic had been selected. The participant and
confederate then drew slips of paper out of a grab bag one at a
time. Each slip had one of five conversation topics on it. After each
had drawn one slip, they looked at both and compared. If they had
drawn the same slip, they would discuss that topic. If they had
drawn different slips, they would place both slips back into the bag
and draw again until they both drew the same slip at the same time.
In one condition, only “racial profiling” was written on more than
one slip, and in the other, only “love and relationships” was written
on more than one slip, thus ensuring that the experimenter could
decide what topic would be discussed.
After the topic had been chosen, the confederate entered the
conversation room, where there was one chair at the center of the
room and one chair in the corner. The confederate placed his jacket
and book bag on the chair at the center and excused himself to the
bathroom. The experimenter then instructed the participant to
move the chair in the corner so that “you and your partner can have
a comfortable conversation” while the experimenter retrieved the
rest of the study materials. After a short time, the experimenter
returned with a thought-listing task and asked the participant to
complete it in the next 5 min “since your partner has not returned
yet.” After 5 min, the experimenter returned, collected the thoughtlisting task, and handed the participant the ESTS, explaining that
he should complete the scale “while I go look for your partner.”
After completing the ESTS, participants were probed for suspicions, fully debriefed, and thanked for their participation.
Study 4 included three specific hypotheses. First, in the absence
of learning goals, we expected that participants would sit farther
away from their partner when talking about racial profiling than
when talking about love and relationships. There would, however,
be no such difference when learning goals were present. Second,
because the same Black confederate was used in all conditions, we
hypothesized that participants would spontaneously generate more
stereotype-threat-relevant thoughts when discussing racial profiling, regardless of the presence or absence of learning goals. It was
further hypothesized that participants would score higher on the
ESTS when discussing racial profiling as opposed to love and
relationships. Third, we hypothesized that in the absence of learning goals, participants’ scores on the ESTS would mediate the
relationship between topic discussed (racial profiling vs. love and

relationships) and social distance. However, this would not be the
case in the presence of learning goals.

Results
Distance Findings
The data were submitted to a 2 ⫻ 2 ANOVA with conversation
topic and instruction condition as the independent variables and
distance as the dependent variable. Again, there was no covariate
in this analysis. The analysis produced a main effect of conversation topic, with participants sitting farther away from their partner
in the racial profiling condition (M ⫽ 48.65 in.) than in the love
and relationships condition (M ⫽ 42.47 in.), F(1, 51) ⫽ 4.53, p ⬍
.05, ␩2 ⫽ .08. However, as shown in Figure 4, this main effect was
qualified by the predicted interaction, F(1, 51) ⫽ 9.46, p ⬍ .01,
␩2 ⫽ .16.
Simple effects tests further confirmed the hypotheses. Participants sat farther away from their partner in the racial profiling
condition (M ⫽ 54.68 in.) than in the love and relationships
condition (M ⫽ 39.82 in.) when learning goals were not present,
F(1, 51) ⫽ 13.80, p ⬍ .001, ␩2 ⫽ .21. This was not the case when
learning goals were present, F(1, 51) ⬍ 0.50, ns. Similarly, when
participants expected to discuss racial profiling, they sat farther
away from their partner when learning goals were absent (M ⫽
54.68 in.) than when learning goals were present (M ⫽ 42.63 in.),
F(1, 51) ⫽ 9.08, p ⬍ .01, ␩2 ⫽ .15. This was not the case when
participants expected to discuss love and relationships, F(1, 51) ⫽
1.82, p ⬎ .10. These results suggest that the results obtained in
Studies 1–3 were not simply due to participants’ being in the
numerical minority (i.e., they were solo in-group members paired
with two out-group members).

Thought-Listing Task
Participants showed a great willingness to report stereotypethreat-relevant thoughts, with 27% of participants listing such
thoughts. Examples of stereotype-threat-relevant thought listings
included statements such as the following: “I feel awkward knowing that I, a White person, will be talking to a Black man about
racial profiling”; “I hope it doesn’t affect my conversation on the
subject that the other person is of a different race, though I don’t
imagine it would”; “My first thought when I saw ‘racial profiling’
as a topic, and my partner was of a different ethnicity was that I
might want to be cognizant of this and be somewhat careful in my
remarks”; and “Oh shit, this guy is Black!”
To be considered stereotype threat relevant, a thought had to
include specific reference to anxiety and race. A chi-square test
revealed that significantly more participants generated stereotypethreat-relevant listings when they anticipated discussing racial
profiling (50%) than when they anticipated discussing love and
relationships (4%), ␹2(1) ⫽ 12.2, p ⬍ .001. As hypothesized,
participants who anticipated discussing racial profiling were as
likely to generate stereotype-threat-related thoughts when learning
goals were present (50%) as when learning goals were absent
(50%). Similarly, participants expecting to discuss love and relationships were equally unlikely to generate stereotype-threatrelated thoughts (in fact, only 1 participant listed a stereotyperelevant thought in the love and relationships condition).

THE SPACE BETWEEN US

Figure 4.

103

Distance scores in Study 4. Values are means (and standard errors); F(1, 51) ⫽ 9.46, p ⬍ .01.

Next, it was hypothesized that participants who generated
stereotype-threat-relevant thoughts would be more likely to create
distance from their conversation partners, but only in the absence
of learning goals. To test this hypothesis, we submitted participants’ distance measures to a 2 ⫻ 2 ANOVA with learning goals
(present vs. absent) and stereotype-threat-relevant thought listings
(present vs. absent) as the predictor variables. Because only 1
participant who was assigned to talk about love and relationships
listed a stereotype-threat-relevant thought, the analysis was restricted to participants assigned to talk about racial profiling. This
analysis revealed a main effect of learning goals condition, F(1,
24) ⫽ 7.59, p ⫽ .01, ␩2 ⫽ .24, that was qualified by the predicted
two-way interaction, F(1, 24) ⫽ 7.46, p ⫽ .01, ␩2 ⫽ .24. Simple
effects tests further revealed that participants who anticipated
talking about racial profiling and who were not given learning
goals sat farther away from their partners when they generated
stereotype-threat-relevant thoughts (M ⫽ 65.14) than when they
did not (M ⫽ 40.14), F(1, 24) ⫽ 9.36, p ⫽ .005, ␩2 ⫽ .28. When
learning goals were present, however, participants who expected to
discuss racial profiling sat equally close when they generated
stereotype-threat-relevant thoughts (M ⫽ 45.21) and when they did
not generate such thoughts (M ⫽ 45.12).
These findings suggest that participants spontaneously generate
stereotype-threat-relevant thoughts and that the generation of these
thoughts is related to distance in the absence of learning goals.
However, given the fact that no participants who anticipated discussing love and relationships generated threat-relevant thought
listings in the absence of learning goals, it was not possible to test
the potential mediational role of these thought listings. Additionally, a continuous variable might be better able to capture the
relationship between an individual’s subjective experience of
threat and distance than would the mere presence of a threat-

relevant thought listing. Therefore, the ESTS was included in order
to supplement these limitations of the thought-listings methodology.

Explicit Stereotype Threat Scale
The percentage of stereotype-threat-relevant thoughts participants listed was highly correlated with their score on the ESTS,
indicating high construct validity of the scale, r(55) ⫽ .52, p ⬍
.001. A t test revealed that participants who listed stereotypethreat-relevant thoughts scored higher on the ESTS (M ⫽ 5.00)
than those who did not list stereotype-threat-relevant thoughts
(M ⫽ 3.17), t(53) ⫽ 5.70, p ⬍ .001, ␩2 ⫽ .38. Next, stereotype
threat scores were submitted to a 2 ⫻ 2 ANOVA where conversation topic and learning goals were the independent variables.
Similar to the thought-listing results, this analysis revealed only a
main effect of conversation topic, such that participants expecting
to discuss racial profiling reported significantly higher levels of
stereotype threat (M ⫽ 4.30) than did those expecting to discuss
love and relationships (M ⫽ 3.00), F(1, 51) ⫽ 17.98, p ⬍ .001,
␩2 ⫽ .26. That those who generated stereotype-threat-relevant
thoughts experienced more stereotype threat and that patterns of
thought listings and stereotype threat scores were similar demonstrates a strong relationship between an individual’s stereotype
threat score and the occurrence of stereotype-threat-relevant
thoughts.

Mediational Analysis
To test the relationship between explicit stereotype threat scores
and distance, we followed the steps outlined by Baron and Kenny
(1986) to test for mediation, first in the learning goals absent

GOFF, STEELE, AND DAVIES

104

condition and then in the learning goals present condition. All four
steps outlined by Baron and Kenny are satisfied when learning
goals are absent. That is, first, the independent variable (conversation topic) significantly predicts the dependent variable (distance), B ⫽ 14.86, t(26) ⫽ 3.28, p ⬍ .005, ␩2 ⫽ .29. Second, the
independent variable predicts the mediator variable (explicit stereotype threat score), B ⫽ 1.31, t(26) ⫽ 3.41, p ⬍ .005, ␩2 ⫽ .31.
Third, when the independent variable is held constant, the mediator variable predicts the dependent variable, B ⫽ 4.96, t(25) ⫽
2.32, p ⬍ .05, ␩2 ⫽ .18. And fourth, when the mediator is held
constant, the independent variable predicts significantly less of the
variance of the dependent variable (Sobel test, Z ⫽ 1.92, p ⫽ .05).
These steps are not satisfied when learning goals are present.
This finding supports the hypothesized moderated mediation
model. Because the independent variable still predicts the dependent variable after the mediator variable is controlled for, this
model may best be described as moderated partial mediation. This
suggests that other factors may also contribute to the effect of
threat on distancing.

A Note on Design and Mediation
Because there was concern that asking questions about one’s
experience of stereotype threat might impact racial distancing
behavior, and because there was no a priori reason to suspect that
positioning one’s chair would influence one’s experience of stereotype threat, the ESTS was moved to the end of the experiment.
Because this mediator variable was placed after the primary dependent variable, it can be argued that it is improper to test for
mediation, as the study does not have a conventional mediational
design. However, recent analytic strategies have defied this convention (Keller & Dauenheimer, 2003).
When Keller and Dauenheimer (2003) found that there was no
a priori reason that their dependent variable should influence their
mediator variable, they compared the mediational pathways as
they hypothesized, as well as “reverse”—that is, switching the
mediator and dependent variables in the analyses. If this reverse
mediation is a less compelling statistical model for the data than
the mediational model proposed by the researchers, then the design
irregularity is overlooked.
In the present research, there was no reason to believe, a priori,
that positioning one’s chair would influence the level of stereotype
threat one reported. Therefore, the data were submitted to a reverse
mediational analysis, with conversation topic as the independent
variable, distance as the mediator variable, and explicit stereotype
threat score as the dependent variable. As this analysis produced
numbers identical to those of the hypothesized mediational model
and the hypothesized model is more logically consistent, we concluded that although the study design is not a traditional mediational design, the hypothesized mediational analysis is an appropriate way to interpret the present data.

Discussion
Study 4 demonstrated that the findings of Studies 1–3 could be
extended to one-on-one interactions with actual partners. Additionally, participants demonstrated access to their subjective experiences of stereotype threat, and reports of this experience were, in
turn, predictive of behavior.

General Discussion
Racial prejudice and racial distancing are not the same thing.
Though both may lead to racial harms, they can do so via different
mechanisms and it is possible for one to exist in the absence of the
other. The four studies presented here provide support for the
hypothesis that stereotype threat may cause Whites to distance
themselves from Blacks. This distancing was unrelated to racial
prejudices, either implicit or explicit. When White participants
expected to discuss a racially contentious topic with Black partners, the threat of appearing racist caused them to physically
distance themselves from those partners in each of the four studies.
Both stereotype activation (Studies 1–3) and stereotype-threatrelevant thoughts (Study 4) were positively related to distance,
such that the more White participants thought about the stereotype,
the farther away they moved. However, neither implicit nor explicit measures of prejudice predicted this pattern of distancing
(Studies 2 and 3), and no measure of prejudice moderated the role
of stereotype threat on distance. Identifying which contexts can
overwhelm individual differences in racial attitudes and under
what conditions would be a worthy project in light of these results.
Also deserving further investigation is the question of subjective
experience. Study 4 lends support to the hypothesis that individuals may consciously experience stereotype threat (Marx & Goff,
2005). Although this does not resolve the debate about the relative
role of “hot” and “cold” processes in producing performance
decrements (Schmader & Johns, 2003; see Wheeler & Petty,
2001), it does suggest that there is an underexplored qualitative
component to this phenomenon. The subjective experience of
stereotyped targets, therefore, deserves consideration in future
research on the topic.
The present research also explores new facets of stereotype
threat theory. These studies are the first to apply stereotype threat
to interracial interactions. These findings suggest a promising
salve for the negative consequences of stereotype threat, namely,
learning goals (Dweck, 1996; Hong et al., 1995). In Studies 3 and
4, participants who were given learning goals were made to feel
that their situation was less evaluative. Participants were therefore
protected from the negative consequences of stereotype threat.
This suggests an exciting direction for future stereotype threat
research. Although stereotype threat may operate differently for
different groups and in different contexts, it is possible that adopting learning goals may help in other situations, perhaps because,
despite the powerful threats participants experience, they are all
the more willing to find ways to be at ease in these important
settings.
It may be important to note that a shift away from an entitative
framework with regard to stereotypes is also a shift away from an
essentialist framework of that stereotype. That is, understanding a
generalization about one’s group as something other than innate
and unchangeable is a departure from the dominant view of stereotypes—that they are related to some essential essence of group
members (Cosmides, Tooby, & Kurzban, 2003; Eberhardt & Goff,
2005). This is important because it means that any group-based
stereotypes for gender, race, and other “biologistic” groups are, by
default, likely to produce higher levels of stereotype threat owing
to the essentialist conception of the group and the consequent
stereotypes. A focus on learning may cause evaluations to seem
less dire, or it may cause stereotypes to be seen in less essentialist

THE SPACE BETWEEN US

terms, and either of these outcomes may protect one from the
negative consequences of stereotype threat. Therefore, regardless
of how learning goals protect individuals against the negative
consequences of stereotype threat, their utility deserves further
investigation.
Apart from advances regarding stereotype threat, the present
research suggests that studying racial distancing behavior—
separate from racial prejudice— has utility. Though perceivers are
capable of distinguishing between racially prejudiced intent and
racial harms (Swim, Scott, Sechrist, Campbell, & Stangor, 2003),
social psychologists sometimes do not make this distinction. That
is, by conflating racial harms (such as distancing) with racial
prejudice, researchers run the risk of ignoring important causes of
racial harms. And, though moving a chair may not constitute dire
racial injury, it is easy to imagine how similar subtle behaviors
could lead to feelings of isolation, or worse, when experienced in
the aggregate. In some contexts, such as in an interview or when
solving problems as a team, nonverbal behaviors have even been
demonstrated to produce racial harms in the moment (Dovidio et
al., 2002; Sanchez-Burks, 2002; Word et al., 1974). The present
research suggests, then, that racial harms occurring in the absence
of racial animus may be no less damaging for their lack of intent.

A Note on Stereotype Threat and Racism
If a racial harm occurs but racist actors and intents are not
present, what does one call that harm? Is it racism? As BonillaSilva (2003) mused, is it possible to have “racism without racists”?
Although racial prejudice remains a persistent feature of the U.S.
social landscape, the present research suggests that there exist
contexts that can overwhelm one’s racial biases— or lack thereof.
That is not to say that these individuals lack racial prejudice or that
racial prejudice is not an important predictor of racial discrimination. But in contexts such as those in the present research, is it
objectionable to fear being seen as racist?
This question is particularly important if calling an action racist
can lead to further racial disparities (e.g., by causing distancing
behavior). However, using the term racism might also have certain
advantages. For example, it seems difficult to imagine that terms
such as stereotype threat, contextual factors, or racial disparities
would inspire the kind of moral outrage or rush to respond that the
term racism occasions. The fact that participants in these experiments seemed so vigilant to the possibility of appearing racist
indicates that they may also be motivated to reduce racism where
they observe it.
Framing racial disparities as racism may influence an agent’s
desire to alleviate those racial disparities as well as that individual’s level of stereotype threat. Consequently, framing racial disparities in terms of racism could influence how and even whether
the disparity is confronted. It is possible, then, that the term racism
itself is due for reexamination. Although racism has been defined
in many different ways (for a review, see Collins, 1991; Jones,
1997), it is rare that scholars or laypeople distinguish between
racism and racists. Perhaps it is possible to construct a conception
of racism that foregrounds the harm being done to one group
without simultaneously castigating the members of another. Regardless, although the question of what to call racial harms without
racist actors is beyond the scope of this empirical project, it seems
an important question for researchers of racial disparities to con-

105

sider, as changing our conception of the problem may allow us to
form better solutions to it.

Conclusion
The present research is a contextual approach to interracial
difficulties and is therefore an optimistic one. A stereotype threat
approach to interracial contact does not locate racial problems in
the “hearts and minds” of prejudiced agents. Rather, it suggests
that certain features of an interracial context can create identity
threats that lead to distancing. And, because the threat is contextual, so too may be the solution. Though social psychologists
frequently examine racial discrimination by investigating problems in the “hearts and minds” of racist actors, it may be that the
metaphorical racial divide is amenable to subtle changes in context. Creating a context in which individuals are free to act out
their desire to learn may be enough to bring people together— or
at least have the beginnings of a comfortable conversation.

References
Allport, G. W. (1954). The nature of prejudice. Oxford, England: AddisonWesley.
Baron, R. M., & Kenny, D. A. (1986). The moderator–mediator variable
distinction in social psychological research: Conceptual, strategic and
statistical considerations. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
51, 1173–1182.
Blascovich, J., Spencer, S. J., Quinn, D., & Steele, C. M. (2001). African
Americans and high blood pressure: The role of stereotype threat.
Psychological Science, 12, 225–229.
Bobo, L. (1983). Whites’ opposition to busing: Symbolic racism or realistic
group conflict? Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 45,
1196 –1210.
Bogardus, E. S. (1925). Social distance and its origins. Journal of Applied
Sociology, 9, 216 –226.
Bogardus, E. S. (1938). Social distance and its practical applications.
Sociology and Social Research, 22, 462– 476.
Bonilla-Silva, E. (2003). Racism without racists: Color-blind racism and
the persistence of racial inequality in the United States. Boulder, CO:
Rowman & Littlefield.
Bosson, J. K., Haymovitz, E. L., & Pinel, E. C. (2004). When saying and
doing diverge: The effects of stereotype threat on self-reported versus
non-verbal anxiety. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 40,
247–255.
Brigham, J. C. (1993). Racial attitudes of college students. Journal of
Applied Social Psychology, 23, 1933–1967.
Britt, T. W., Boniecki, K. A., Vescio, T. K., Biernat, M., & Brown, L. M.
(1996). Intergroup anxiety: A person ⫻ situation approach. Personality
and Social Psychology Bulletin, 22, 1177–1188.
Button, S. B., Mathieu, J. E., & Zajac, D. (1996). Goal orientation in
organizational research: A conceptual and empirical foundation. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 67, 26 – 48.
Chiu, C., Hong, Y., & Dweck, C. S. (1997). Lay dispositions and implicit
theories of personality. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
73, 19 –30.
Collins, P. H. (1991). Black feminist thought: Knowledge, consciousness,
and the politics of empowerment. Perspectives on gender (Vol. 2). New
York: Routledge.
Cosmides, L., Tooby, J., & Kurzban, R. (2003). Perceptions of race. Trends
in Cognitive Sciences, 7, 173–179.
Davies, P. G., Spencer, S. J., Quinn, D. M., & Gerhardstein, R. (2002).
Consuming images: How television commercials that elicit stereotype

106

GOFF, STEELE, AND DAVIES

threat can restrain women academically and professionally. Personality
and Social Psychology Bulletin, 28, 1615–1628.
Dovidio, J. F. (2001). On the nature of contemporary prejudice: The third
wave. Journal of Social Issues, 57, 829 – 849.
Dovidio, J. F., Kawakami, K., & Gaertner, S. L. (2002). Implicit and
explicit prejudice and interracial interaction. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 82, 62– 68.
Duckitt, J. (1992). Psychology and prejudice: A historical analysis and
integrative framework. American Psychologist, 47, 1182–1193.
Dunton, B. C., & Fazio, R. H. (1997). An individual difference measure of
motivation to control prejudiced reactions. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 23, 316 –326.
Dweck, C. S. (1996). Implicit theories as organizers of goals and behavior.
In P. M. Gollwitzer & J. A. Bargh (Eds.), The psychology of action:
Linking cognition and motivation to behavior (pp. 69 –90). New York:
Guilford Press.
Eberhardt, J. L., & Goff, P. A. (2005). Seeing race. In C. S. Crandall & M.
Schaller (Eds.), The social psychology of prejudice: Historical perspectives. Seattle, WA: Lewinian Press.
Frantz, C. M., Cuddy, A. J. C., Burnett, M., Ray, H., & Hart, A. (2004). A
threat in the computer: The Race Implicit Association Test as a stereotype threat experience. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 30,
1611–1624.
Gaertner, S. L., & Dovidio, J. F. (1986). The aversive form of racism. In
J. F. Dovidio & S. L. Gaertner (Eds.), Prejudice, discrimination, and
racism (pp. 61– 89). Orlando, FL: Academic Press.
Goff, P. A., Thomas, M. A., & Jackson, M. C. (in press). “Ain’t I a
woman”: Towards an intersectional approach to person perception and
group-based harms. Sex Roles.
Greenwald, A. G., McGhee, D. E., & Schwartz, J. L. K. (1998). Measuring
individual differences in implicit cognition: The Implicit Association
Test. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 74, 1464 –1480.
Hong, Y., Chiu, C., & Dweck, C. S. (1995). Implicit theories of intelligence: Reconsidering the role of confidence in achievement motivation.
In M. Kernis (Ed.), Efficacy, agency, and self-esteem (pp. 197–216).
New York: Plenum.
Jones, J. M. (1997). Prejudice and racism. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Keller, J., & Dauenheimer, D. (2003). Stereotype threat in the classroom:
Dejection mediates the disrupting threat effect on women’s math performance. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 29, 371–381.
Macrae, C. N., Bodenhausen, G. V., Milne, A. B., & Jetten, J. (1994). Out
of mind but back in sight: Stereotypes on the rebound. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 67, 808 – 817.
Marx, D. M., & Goff, P. A. (2005). Clearing the air: The effect of
experimenter race on target’s test performance and subjective experience. British Journal of Social Psychology, 44, 645– 657.
McConahay, J. B. (1986). Modern racism, ambivalence, and the Modern
Racism Scale. In J. F. Dovidio & S. L. Gaertner (Eds.), Prejudice,
discrimination, and racism (pp. 91–125). Orlando, FL: Academic Press.
O’Brien, L. T., & Crandall, C. S. (2003). Stereotype threat and arousal:
Effects on women’s math performance. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 29, 782–789.
Plant, E. A. (2004). Responses to interracial interactions over time. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 30, 1458 –1471.
Plant, E. A., & Devine, P. G. (1998). Internal and external motivation to
respond without prejudice. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 75, 811– 832.
Richeson, J. A., & Shelton, J. N. (2003). When prejudice does not pay:

Effects of interracial contact on executive function. Psychological Science, 14, 287–290.
Rosenberg, M. (1965). Society and the adolescent self-image. Princeton,
NJ: Princeton University Press.
Samelson, F. (1978). From “race psychology” to “studies in prejudice”:
Some observations on the thematic reversal in social psychology. Journal of the Behavioral Sciences, 14, 265–278.
Sanchez-Burks, J. (2002). Protestant relational ideology and (in)attention
to relational cues in work settings. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 83, 919 –929.
Schmader, T., & Johns, M. (2003). Convergent evidence that stereotype
threat reduces working memory capacity. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 85, 440 – 452.
Shelton, J. N., Richeson, J. A., Salvatore, J., & Trawalter, S. (2005). Ironic
effects of racial bias during interracial interactions. Psychological Science, 16, 397– 402.
Steele, C. M. (1992, April). Race and the schooling of Black Americans.
Atlantic Monthly, 68 –78.
Steele, C. M. (1997). A threat in the air: How stereotypes shape intellectual
identity and performance. American Psychologist, 52, 613– 629.
Steele, C. M., & Aronson, J. (1995). Stereotype threat and the intellectual
test performance of African Americans. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 69, 797– 811.
Stone, J., Lynch, C., Sjomeling, M., & Darley, J. M. (1999). Stereotype
threat effects on Black and White athletic performance. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 77, 1213–1227.
Swim, J. K., Scott, E. D., Sechrist, G. B., Campbell, B., & Stangor, C.
(2003). The role of intent and harm in judgments of prejudice and
discrimination. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 84, 944 –
959.
Ugwuegbu, D. C. E., & Anusiem, A. U. (1982). Effects of stress on
interpersonal distance in a simulated interview situation. Journal of
Social Psychology, 116, 3–7.
Vohs, K. D., & Schmeichel, B. J. (2003). Self-regulation and the extended
now: Controlling the self alters the subjective experience of time. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 85, 217–230.
Vorauer, J. D., Hunter, A. J., Main, K. J., & Roy, S. A. (2000). Metastereotype activation: Evidence from indirect measures for specific
evaluative concerns experienced by members of dominant groups in
inter-group interactions. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
78, 690 –707.
Vorauer, J. D., Main, K. G., & O’Connell, G. B. (1998). How do individuals expect to be viewed by members of lower status groups: Content
and implications of meta-stereotypes. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 75, 917–937.
Vorauer, J. D., & Ross, M. (1999). Self-awareness and feeling transparent:
Failing to suppress oneself. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology,
35, 415– 440.
Vorauer, J. D., & Turpie, C. A. (2004). Disruptive effects of vigilance on
dominant group members’ treatment of outgroup members: Choking
versus shining under pressure. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 87, 384 –399.
Wheeler, S. C., & Petty, R. E. (2001). The effects of stereotype activation
on behavior: A review of possible mechanisms. Psychological Bulletin,
127, 797– 826.
Word, C. O., Zanna, M. P., & Cooper, J. (1974). The nonverbal mediation
of self-fulfilling prophecies in interracial interaction. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 10, 109 –120.

THE SPACE BETWEEN US

107

Appendix
Terms Used in the Word-Stem Completion Task
General White words

White racist words

Social anxiety words

___TE (white) (smite)
W__P (WASP) (whip)
M______Y (majority) (minority)
__CE (race) (face)
VA_____ (vanilla) (vampire)
PR______E (privilege) (procedure)
BL___ (blond) (blood)
E____E (Europe) (engine)
SU______ (suburbia) (surprise)
HI_____ (history) (himself)

RA____ (racist) (raised)
SL___ (slave) (slash)
HO___ (honky) (honey)
H__E (hate) (hole)
MA____ (master) (market)
S_____Y (slavery) (society)
HA_____ (hanging) (harvest)
CRA____ (cracker) (crashed)
I_______NT (intolerant) (investment)
B____ED (bigoted) (bearded)

S_Y (shy) (say)
SC___D (scared) (scored)
SW___ (sweat) (sweet)
WO___ (worry) (woman)
___SE (tense) (sense)
AW_____ (awkward) (awesome)
___GE (judge) (large)
ST____ (stress) (strong)
IN______ (insecure) (internal)
____OUS (nervous) (obvious)

Note. Words in parentheses are target completions followed by possible alternative completions (in italic).

Received December 19, 2005
Revision received April 15, 2007
Accepted April 17, 2007 䡲

Members of Underrepresented Groups:
Reviewers for Journal Manuscripts Wanted
If you are interested in reviewing manuscripts for APA journals, the APA Publications and
Communications Board would like to invite your participation. Manuscript reviewers are vital to the
publications process. As a reviewer, you would gain valuable experience in publishing. The P&C
Board is particularly interested in encouraging members of underrepresented groups to participate
more in this process.
If you are interested in reviewing manuscripts, please write to the address below. Please note the
following important points:
• To be selected as a reviewer, you must have published articles in peer-reviewed journals. The
experience of publishing provides a reviewer with the basis for preparing a thorough, objective
review.
• To be selected, it is critical to be a regular reader of the five to six empirical journals that are most
central to the area or journal for which you would like to review. Current knowledge of recently
published research provides a reviewer with the knowledge base to evaluate a new submission
within the context of existing research.
• To select the appropriate reviewers for each manuscript, the editor needs detailed information.
Please include with your letter your vita. In the letter, please identify which APA journal(s) you
are interested in, and describe your area of expertise. Be as specific as possible. For example,
“social psychology” is not sufficient—you would need to specify “social cognition” or “attitude
change” as well.
• Reviewing a manuscript takes time (1– 4 hours per manuscript reviewed). If you are selected to
review a manuscript, be prepared to invest the necessary time to evaluate the manuscript
thoroughly.
Write to Journals Office, American Psychological Association, 750 First Street, NE, Washington,
DC 20002-4242.

