Journal of Personality and Social Psychology
2008, Vol. 94, No. 3, 429 – 459

Copyright 2008 by the American Psychological Association
0022-3514/08/$12.00 DOI: 10.1037/0022-3514.94.3.429

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Balancing Connectedness and Self-Protection Goals in Close Relationships:
A Levels-of-Processing Perspective on Risk Regulation
Sandra L. Murray, Jaye L. Derrick, and Sadie Leder

John G. Holmes

University at Buffalo, The State University of New York

University of Waterloo

A model of risk regulation is proposed to explain how low and high self-esteem people balance the
tension between self-protection and connectedness goals in romantic relationships. This model assumes
that interpersonal risk automatically activates connectedness and self-protection goals. The activation of
these competing goals then triggers an executive control system that resolves this goal conflict. One
correlational study and 8 experiments manipulating risk, goal strength, and executive strength and then
measuring implicit and explicit goal activation and execution strongly supported the model. For people
high in self-esteem, risk triggers a control system that directs them toward the situations of dependence
within their relationship that can fulfill connectedness goals. For people low in self-esteem, however, the
activation of connectedness goals triggers a control system that prioritizes self-protection goals and
directs them away from situations where they need to trust or depend on their partner.
Keywords: relationships, risk, connectedness, self-protection

To satisfy self-protection concerns, Sally should be motivated to
think and behave in ways that limit her dependence on Harry’s actions
in the short term and diminish the long-term potential pain of relationship loss (Murray et al., 2006). However, to meet basic goals for
a close, satisfying connection with Harry, she needs to risk substantial
dependence (Kelley, 1979). People in satisfying relationships routinely enter into situations that give a partner considerable power over
their outcomes and think in ways that invest great importance in the
relationship (Gagne & Lydon, 2004; Murray, 1999). For instance,
they respond to the partner’s needs as they arise and, trustingly, leave
the timing of repayment open-ended (Clark & Grote, 1998). They also
overlook or excuse their partner’s transgressions, risking the chance of
similar misdeeds and hurts in the future (Rusbult, Verette, Whitney,
Slovik, & Lipkus, 1991).
To effectively negotiate interpersonal life, people need a regulatory system in place to balance the tension between connectedness and self-protection goals (Murray et al., 2006). This article
presents one correlational and eight experimental studies illustrating how this risk regulation system operates in romantic relationships for people who are differentially sensitive to rejection—
specifically, people relatively low versus high in self-esteem
(Leary & Baumeister, 2000). We hope to demonstrate that interpersonal risk automatically activates the goals of seeking connection and avoiding rejection. This goal conflict then triggers a
corrective, executive control system— one that typically interferes
with the fulfillment of connectedness goals for low self-esteem,
but not high self-esteem, people. In the remainder of this introduction, we detail the operation of this system and then describe
our research strategy.

Ask somebody to love you
Takes a lot of nerve
Ask somebody to love you
You got a lot of nerve
—Paul Simon, “Look at That” (1999)

Simon’s observation that love requires taking risks aptly captures a
basic approach–avoidance conflict in interpersonal life. Risking
thoughts and behaviors that increase closeness necessarily increases
both the likelihood and pain of rejection (Murray, Holmes, & Collins,
2006). Consequently, to satisfy connectedness goals (Baumeister &
Leary, 1995), people need to compromise self-protection concerns.
Perhaps nowhere is this conflict more poignant than in people’s
romantic relationships. Imagine that Sally has a bad day at work and
comes to her husband Harry for consolation. Her willingness to
increase dependence by seeking Harry’s support is critical for fostering a satisfying connection to Harry (Collins & Feeney, 2000), but in
seeking Harry’s support, she also risks his criticism or rebuff. Moreover, the pain of rejection and relationship loss only increases the
more Sally comes to depend on Harry for comfort.
Sandra L. Murray, Jaye L. Derrick, and Sadie Leder, Department of
Psychology, University at Buffalo, The State University of New York;
John G. Holmes, Department of Psychology, University of Waterloo,
Waterloo, Ontario, Canada.
Jaye L. Derrick and Sadie Leder contributed equally to the article, and
the order of their authorship was determined randomly. We would like to
thank Paul Luce for his consultation on the lexical decision studies, Dale
Griffin for statistical consultation, Grainne Fitzsimons for her insightful
comments, and numerous undergraduate research assistants for serving as
experimenters. The preparation of the article was supported by National
Institute of Mental Health Grant MH 60105-02 awarded to Sandra L.
Murray.
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Sandra L.
Murray, Department of Psychology, Park Hall, University at Buffalo, The
State University of New York, Buffalo, NY 14260-4110. E-mail:
smurray@buffalo.edu

The Risk Regulation System
The goal of the risk regulation system is to optimize the sense of
safety or comfort that is possible given one’s relationship circumstances. This sense of assurance or safety is experienced as a
feeling of relative invulnerability to hurt. To optimize this sense of
429

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

430

MURRAY, DERRICK, LEDER, AND HOLMES

assurance, this system functions dynamically and adjusts to relationship circumstance. In particular, it shifts the priority given to
the goals of seeking closeness and protecting oneself against
rejection so as to minimize the likelihood and pain of being hurt
and vulnerable (Murray et al., 2006).
Such a system is needed to govern or arbitrate people’s behavior
in risky situations—situations of dependence where one partner’s
actions constrain the other’s capacity to satisfy important needs
and goals. Couples are interdependent in multiple ways, ranging
from deciding whose movie preference to favor on a given weekend to deciding what constitutes a fair allocation of household
chores. Couples must also negotiate different personalities, such as
merging one partner’s laissez-faire nature with the other’s more
controlled style (Kelley, 1979). Given multiple layers of interdependence, areas of incompatibility and conflict are inevitable—
raising the possibility that one’s partner might not prove to be
responsive to one’s needs.
Once the specter of rejection is raised, people must choose how
much dependence (and, thus, how much vulnerability) they safely
can risk (Kelley, 1979). Throughout the course of the relationship,
partners need to make iterative and often unconscious choices
between seeking connection (increasing dependence) and selfprotection (decreasing dependence). Consequently, to risk being in
the relationship, people need a system in place that functions to
keep them feeling reasonably safe in a context of continued vulnerability (Murray et al., 2006).
Figure 1 illustrates how the risk regulation system operates to

Figure 1.

govern people’s choices in dependent situations. Situations that
involve interpersonal risk and vulnerability automatically activate
two competing goals—the goal of seeking connection (Path A) and
the goal of protecting against rejection (Paths B and C). The link
between risk and the appetitive goal of connection reflects the
functionalist argument that the best means of managing a capricious and dangerous world is to seek connection to others who will
meet one’s needs (Bowlby, 1969; Kelley, 1979; Leary & Baumeister, 2000; Mikulincer & Shaver, 2003; Tooby & Cosmides, 1996).
The link between risk and the aversive goal of self-protection (Path
B) and between connectedness and self-protection goals (Path C)
reflect the unfortunate reality that others will not always be motivated to do so. Certain situations, such as conflicts of interest, are
also riskier than others. In such situations, even generally responsive others might not meet one’s needs. Certain people, such as
those low in self-esteem (Murray, Rose, Bellavia, Holmes, &
Kusche, 2002), high in attachment anxiety (Mikulincer & Shaver,
2003), or high in rejection sensitivity (Downey & Feldman, 1996),
are more hurt by another’s inattentiveness. For these reasons, the
combination of risk and the desire to seek connection activates the
goal of self-protection.
The model further stipulates that the intensity of the conflict
between connectedness and self-protection goals depends on the
immediacy of the provoking risk. The moderating path (Path D)
linking risk immediacy to the strength of connectedness and selfprotection goals captures this assumption. Imagine that Harry’s
best friend broke a promise to him—a threat that is less immediate

The risk regulation system in relationships.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

RISK REGULATION

because it arises from the external relationship world. Such risks
induce feelings of vulnerability and activate the goal of approaching his spouse Sally for comfort (Bowlby, 1969). Needing her
comfort then activates the goal of protecting against the possibility
of Sally’s rejection or nonresponsiveness to his need for support
(Path C). Now imagine that it is Sally who broke a promise—a
threat that is more immediate because it arises internal to Harry’s
relationship world. Such an experience with risk directly activates
connectedness (Path A) and self-protection goals (Path B) and
thereby intensifies the goal conflict (because risks internal to the
relationship activate self-protection goals both directly [Path B]
and indirectly [Path C]). Consequently, Harry’s desire to approach
Sally is likely to be all the more ambivalent when the provoking
risk is internal to his relationship because he needs the comfort of
the very person who made him feel hurt and vulnerable.
Once activated, whether directly (Path B) or indirectly (Path C),
the goal of protecting the self against rejection then triggers an
executive control system (Path E). This system functions as a
stop– go routine— one that resolves the conflict between connectedness and self-protection goals by helping people identify which
specific situations should be avoided and which situations are safe
to approach. The dotted line spanning uncontrolled to controlled
processes at the bottom of Figure 1 reflects the assumption that the
operation of the control system (and its behavioral output) requires
progressively greater cognitive resources than does initial goal
activation.
The paths internal to the control system (Paths F and G) illustrate the two interconnected “if . . . then” contingency rules that
direct Sally toward the situations where it feels safe to increase
dependence on Harry and away from situations where caution
seems needed (Murray et al., 2006). The rules serving this directive function involve (a) an appraisal rule that assesses the likelihood of a partner’s acceptance or rejection in the situation (Path
F) and (b) a signaling rule that links state perceptions of a partner’s
acceptance or rejection to the experience of gratified or hurt
feelings and coincident gains or losses in self-esteem (Path G). The
assessed risk and pain of rejection then regulate people’s subsequent willingness to risk greater dependence with a specific partner (Path H). For people to pursue activated connectedness goals
in response to risk, they should perceive reason to trust in their
partner’s responsiveness to their needs in these situations (Reis,
Clark, & Holmes, 2004), and the prospect of approaching the
partner should affirm rather than threaten the self (Murray, Griffin,
Rose, & Bellavia, 2003).
The existing literature provides good initial support for the basic
assumptions underlying the risk regulation model. First, indirect
evidence suggests that interpersonal risk activates connectedness
goals. General concerns about interpersonal rejection (whether
chronic or acute) sensitize people to social cues in their environment. Rejection by strangers in a computerized chat room increases people’s memory for (positive and negative) social events
in another’s purported diary (Gardner, Pickett, & Brewer, 2000).
Chronically desiring greater social connection also increases people’s accuracy in detecting social cues, such as vocal tone and
facial expression, that reveal which specific others might be capable of meeting needs for social connection (Gardner, Pickett,
Jefferis, & Knowles, 2005; Pickett, Gardner, & Knowles, 2004).
Rejection by strangers increases people’s tendency to behave in
ways that might elicit positive social responses from novel others:

431

It increases willingness to solicit friendships (Maner, DeWall,
Baumeister, & Schaller, 2007), conform (Williams, Cheung, &
Choi, 2001), and work harder on a collective task (Williams &
Sommer, 1997). Indirectly priming rejection by priming failurerelated thoughts also activates thoughts of seeking proximity to
others (Mikulincer, Birnbaum, Woddis, & Nachmias, 2000) and
increases the accessibility of a romantic partner’s name (Mikulincer, Gillath, & Shaver, 2002).
Second, considerable evidence suggests that people are motivated to avoid situations where they might be rejected or hurt.
Leary and Baumeister (2000) argued that avoiding rejection is so
important that the self-system evolved to gauge rejection threats.
They argued that self-esteem is a sociometer that measures a
person’s perceived likelihood of being accepted by others and
regulates behavior. In this metric, painful drops in self-esteem
signal rejection and motivate people to avoid hurtful situations
(MacDonald & Leary, 2005). Consistent with this logic, being
ostracized by strangers or anticipating a future absence of social
connection decreases people’s willingness to put themselves in
situations where they might be vulnerable to others. Such experiences both decrease people’s willingness to sacrifice their own
interests to benefit others (Twenge, Baumeister, DeWall, Ciarocco, & Bartels, 2007) and increase their willingness to aggress
against offending others (Twenge, Baumeister, Tice, & Stucke,
2001).
Third, models of attitudes, emotion, and personality assume that
both approach–appetitive and avoidance–aversive goal systems regulate behavior (Cacioppo, Gardner, & Berntson, 1999; Carver, Sutton,
& Scheier, 2007; Gable, 2005; Gable, Reis, & Elliot, 2000; Higgins,
1998). Our model converges with these traditions in assuming that
ambivalence is a poor guide to behavior and that effective action
requires the resolution of goal conflict (Cacioppo et al., 1999). This
assumption also resonates with Lewin’s classic conceptions of the life
space (Deutsch & Krauss, 1965; Hall & Lindzey, 1957) and depictions of approach–avoidance conflicts within learning theory traditions (Dollard & Miller, 1950; Epstein, 1982).
In Lewinian terms, the need for assurance from threat activates a
tension system. This tension system imbues situations likely to
heighten vulnerability concerns with negative valence and situations
likely to minimize such concerns with positive valence. The respective strength of these valences then orients behavior. If rejection is
more hurtful than acceptance is gratifying, the push to self-protect
(and avoid negative situations) will be stronger than the pull to
connect (and approach positive situations). In fact, the closer Sally
gets to Harry in such situations, the more motivating the goal of
avoiding rejection becomes (because rejection becomes a greater
concern the closer Sally gets to meeting her connectedness goals).
However, the pull to connect will be stronger than the push to avoid
if acceptance is more gratifying than rejection is hurtful.

Moderating Risk Regulation: General Expectations of
Acceptance
For the risk regulation system to be functional in regulating goal
pursuit, it needs to adapt itself to suit specific relationship circumstances. If Sally generally perceives Harry to be responsive to her
needs, becoming wary of Harry at the first sign of insensitivity is
not the optimal means of sustaining the needed sense of assurance.
However, if Sally generally perceives Harry to be unresponsive,

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

432

MURRAY, DERRICK, LEDER, AND HOLMES

such a response might be Sally’s best available means of sustaining some minimal sense of safety from harm. To respond dynamically and efficiently in ongoing situations of dependence, the
control system depicted in Figure 1 needs a heuristic means of
estimating the level of risk inherent in newly encountered situations.
The moderating path (Path I) linking perceptions of a partner’s
acceptance to the operation of the control system illustrates how
this calibration process occurs (Murray et al., 2006). Perceptions of
a partner’s acceptance and responsiveness— expectations that reflect properties of a person’s disposition and specific relationship
experiences—interact with features of the event to control the
sensitivity of the appraisal and signaling rules that guide subsequent behavior in risky situations (Murray, Bellavia, Rose, &
Griffin, 2003; Murray, Griffin, et al., 2003). How might this risk
regulation system operate for low and high self-esteem people?
General expectations of rejection, such as those embodied in
low self-esteem, make specific rejection experiences all the more
painful and motivating (Leary & Baumeister, 2000; Nezlek, Kowalski, Leary, Blevins, & Holgate, 1997). People with low selfesteem also underestimate how much their dating or marital partner values and loves them (Murray, Holmes, Griffin, Bellavia, &
Rose, 2001). Consequently, situations of dependence are inherently riskier for low self-esteem people because feeling rejected
poses a larger proportional loss to a precarious and easily threatened sense of their worthiness of interpersonal connection. A
control system that prioritizes self-protection (prevention) goals in
such situations (Higgins, 1996)— one that is calibrated to quickly
detect rejection, strongly signal the possibility of further hurt, and
then motivate interdependence-minimizing behaviors— best affords low self-esteem people (i.e., lows) some minimal continued
sense of assurance or safety from harm.
Consistent with these hypotheses, people with low self-esteem
are quick to perceive rejection in events as innocuous as a partner
being in a bad mood (Bellavia & Murray, 2003) or a partner
identifying a negative quality in them (Murray et al., 2002). Low
self-esteem people then respond to induced anxieties about rejection by minimizing their partner’s value and, thus, blunting the
anticipated pain of rejection in advance. They rely less on their
partner as a source of self-esteem and comfort (Murray, Holmes,
MacDonald, & Ellsworth, 1998), and they also evaluate their
partner’s qualities more negatively (Murray et al., 1998, 2002).
For people high in self-esteem (i.e., highs), there is little need
for such a self-protectively calibrated executive control system.
For highs, robust and optimistic expectations of a partner’s (and
others’) acceptance render specific rejections less painful (Murray,
Griffin, et al., 2003). Consequently, a control system that prioritizes connectedness (promotion) goals in such situations (Higgins,
1996)— one that is calibrated to readily perceive acceptance,
weakly signal the potential for hurt, and then motivate connection
or interdependence-increasing behaviors—should better afford
highs a continued sense of safety or assurance in the relationship
(Murray et al., 2006). Consistent with this logic, people with high
self-esteem even appraise their own faults as evidence of their
partner’s acceptance (Murray et al., 1998). They also respond to
induced concerns about their dating partner’s likely annoyance
with them by reporting greater feelings of closeness to their partner
(Murray et al., 2002, Experiment 2).

In sum, when the specter of interpersonal risk and vulnerability
activates connectedness goals, people with high self-esteem should
be more likely to actualize this goal than people with low selfesteem. This should occur precisely because the activation of
connectedness goals also activates the signature style underlying
the operation of that person’s risk regulation system.

Research Strategy and Hypotheses
At least five major postulates follow if the risk regulation
system operates as we have hypothesized. These postulates informed both our research strategy and hypotheses.

One
People with high self-esteem should report stronger chronic
desires for connectedness and weaker chronic concerns with selfprotection relative to people with low self-esteem. Their goal
pursuits should also be differentially contingent on circumstance.
Greater relationship stability and, thus, greater reason to trust in
the partner’s availability should foster stronger desires to connect
to the partner for both. However, such reason to trust in the
relationship’s stability should temper self-protection concerns only
for high self-esteem people.
Accordingly, in an initial correlational study, we administered
measures of global self-esteem, connectedness goals (i.e., focus on
relationship positives), and self-protection goals (i.e., focus on
relationship negatives) to people in dating relationships. We expected people with high self-esteem to report stronger connectedness goals and weaker self-protection goals. We also expected
people in longer relationships to report greater focus on seeking
connectedness regardless of self-esteem. However, we expected
such evidence of a partner’s continued availability to temper
self-protection concerns for high self-esteem, but not low selfesteem, people.

Two
If the general prospect of interpersonal risk and vulnerability
automatically activates connectedness goals (Path A in Figure 1),
making salient the external reality that others can be a source of
interpersonal hurt and disappointment should heighten the desire
to connect to the romantic partner for both low and high selfesteem people. The automatic activation of this goal should be
evident in spontaneous, implicit associations to risk and in the
desire to focus on positive aspects of the relationship rather than
perseverate on the negative (Elliot, Gable, & Mapes, 2006; Gable,
2005). We assume that even expressed or self-reported desires to
focus on the positive tap more automatic processes because activating wishes or aspirations may involve less cognitive deliberation than executing such goals (Kunda & Spencer, 2003).
Accordingly, in Experiment 1, we primed the general salience of
external interpersonal risk by asking participants to think of a time
when a significant other disappointed them. We then measured the
speed with which they identified connectedness words in a lexical
decision task. We expected both low and high self-esteem people
to identify connectedness words more quickly in the face of risk.
In Experiment 2, we primed general interpersonal risk and measured the strength of connectedness and self-protection goals

RISK REGULATION

within the current dating relationship (i.e., focus on positives and
gains vs. negatives and losses). We expected both low and high
self-esteem people to report stronger desire to see the positive
when risk was salient.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Three
If connectedness goals activate self-protection goals (Path C in
Figure 1), priming approach/connectedness goals should activate
the signature style underlying a person’s control system (Path E).
Consequently, for people high in self-esteem, activating connectedness goals should trigger their execution or application (because
the risk regulation systems of highs place greater weight on connectedness). In contrast, for people low in self-esteem, activating
connectedness goals should trigger their suppression (because the
risk regulation systems of lows place greater weight on selfprotection). Consistent with our distinction between goal activation and execution, current models of stereotyping assert that the
respective strength of potentially competing goals, such as acquiring knowledge and enhancing the self, governs whether activated
stereotypes are applied to specific group members (Kunda &
Spencer, 2003). In a similar vein, Macrae and Johnston (1998)
argued that even goals activated without conscious awareness can
be overridden by explicit situational cues that suggest goal pursuit
might be hazardous or risky.
For people high in self-esteem, activating connectedness goals
should result in desires for connection that match behavioral
intentions and implicit associations to risk that match more deliberative responses. First, when interpersonal risk is primed (and
connectedness goals are thus activated indirectly), high self-esteem
people should seek out risky situations of dependence within their
relationship (e.g., self-disclosing, seeking support). Second, directly priming approach/connectedness goals should also result in
positive implicit and explicit associations to the partner. This
convergence in more and less deliberative responses should
emerge precisely because the control system of highs typically
prioritizes connectedness over self-protection.1
For people low in self-esteem, the desire to connect should not
translate into greater intention to seek connection by entering into
risky situations of interdependence. Instead, they should suppress
such goals when contemplating which actions to take in their
relationships, much as people motivated to avoid prejudice resist
applying stereotypes when they sense their activation (Kunda &
Spencer, 2003). Accordingly, the simultaneous activation of connectedness and self-protection goals should result in implicit associations to the partner that reflect the desire to connect but, in
stark contrast, avowed behavioral intentions that reflect the need to
distance. In a sense, the heart might seek closeness, whereas the
mind resists it. Signs of such an approach–avoidance conflict are
evident among people most wary of interpersonal dependence. In
a study of transference, young women with a history of parental
abuse responded with positive facial affect to a novel other who
resembled the abusive parent, yet they reported mistrusting and not
caring about this novel other (Berenson & Andersen, 2006). When
primed to think about being disappointed by a significant other,
people anxious–ambivalent in attachment style were quicker to
identify “talk” in a lexical decision task, but they professed trusting
their partner less (Mikulincer, 1998).

433

Accordingly, in Experiment 2, we included dependent measures
tapping the willingness to risk interdependence. We expected high
self-esteem, but not low self-esteem, people to respond to interpersonal risk (and, thus, the indirect activation of connectedness
goals) by expressing stronger intentions to enter dependent situations within their relationships. In Experiments 3 and 4, we directly primed approach/connectedness goals and then measured
explicit reports of relationship closeness (Experiments 3 and 4)
and implicit associations to the partner (Experiment 4). Among
high self-esteem people, we expected priming approach goals to
produce greater feelings of connection to the partner on both
implicit and explicit measures. Among low self-esteem people, we
expected priming approach goals to activate positive implicit associations to the partner (reflecting the activation of connectedness
goals) and diminished reports of closeness on the explicit measure
(reflecting the operation of a self-protectively calibrated control
system).

Four
If risk regulation involves a secondary corrective or executive
control system, its operation should require greater cognitive resources than the activation of connectedness goals consumes.
Consequently, experiences that impair executive control should
not affect the activation of connectedness goals, but they should
impair correction. This logic stems both from models of interpersonal perception and attribution (Gilbert, 1989; Macrae, Bodenhausen, Schloerscheidt, & Milne, 1999) and from models of selfregulation (Muraven & Baumeister, 2000). For instance, Gilbert
(1989) argued that the attribution processes that correct unwarranted dispositional inferences occur only if a person has sufficient
cognitive resources. Similarly, Muraven and Baumeister (2000)
argued that people are successful in overriding automatic impulses
only if they have sufficient self-regulatory resources for selfcontrol available.
If the risk regulation system does require executive control, even
low self-esteem people should react to risk salience by pursuing
connectedness goals in situations where executive control is
usurped (and the operation of their self-protectively calibrated risk
regulation system is compromised). In Experiments 5 and 6, we
manipulated general or external interpersonal risk and executive
control. We manipulated executive control by depleting selfregulatory strength (Muraven & Baumeister, 2000) and by increasing cognitive load (Gilbert, 1989). We then measured people’s
intention to enter risky relationship situations. When risk was
primed and executive control was usurped, we expected low selfesteem (and high self-esteem) people to seek greater interdependence, reporting behavioral intentions likely to fulfill activated
connectedness goals.

Five
If the risk regulation system is functional, its operation should
be sensitive to variations in the strength of connectedness and
self-protection goals. First, risks that stem from the partner’s
1
We are not trying to argue that the distinction between goal activation
and execution will always map perfectly onto the distinction between more
automatic and more controlled processes (Kunda & Spencer, 2003).

MURRAY, DERRICK, LEDER, AND HOLMES

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

434

actions (i.e., an internal threat) should strengthen the activation of
self-protection goals (Path D in Figure 1). Consequently, even
people normally inclined to trust might reduce dependence in
situations where rejection risks are more immediate. Moreover,
acting on such self-protection goals might require little executive
control. Imagine that Sally routinely criticizes Harry’s productivity
and organizational skills. After a stressful day at work, even a high
self-esteem Harry might fear approaching Sally for support. With
repeated experience, keeping his distance in such situations could
even become his automatic response (Bargh & Ferguson, 2000).
We examined this possibility in Experiment 7 by manipulating
the salience of the actual romantic partner’s past transgressions.
We then measured the activation of connectedness and selfprotection goals in a lexical decision task. We expected even high
self-esteem people primed with their partner’s transgressions to
show heightened activation of self-protection goals when circumstances warranted it—that is, when they had not already forgiven
the transgression.
Second, people normally prone to self-protect should become all
the more cautious in situations where the pain of rejection is
intensified. For instance, a low self-esteem Harry should be even
more hesitant to increase interdependence in those situations
where he really needs reassurance (i.e., stronger connection goal)
and Sally seems disapproving. When needs to connect are heightened, the potential of rejection should be of even greater concern,
polarizing behavior (Epstein, 1982). We examined this possibility
in Experiment 8 by manipulating the strength of approach/
connectedness goals and the severity of the actual dating partner’s
criticism. We then measured people’s willingness to increase interdependence by seeking and providing support. When the desire
to approach or seek connection is heightened, we expected a
partner’s criticisms to sting all the more, motivating low selfesteem people to actively distance themselves from caregiving
situations that highlight the need to be interdependent.

Summary
This article presents the first experimental test of a new theoretical perspective on risk regulation (Murray et al., 2006). It
departs from prior research in three major ways. First, it demonstrates that the general salience of interpersonal risk automatically
activates the goal of seeking connection to one’s current romantic
partner for both low and high self-esteem people. In contrast, prior
research on dependence regulation processes assumed that rejection activated only the desire to self-protect among lows (Murray
et al., 1998, 2002). Second, it demonstrates that risk regulation
involves a secondary, executive control system that routinely
thwarts connectedness desires for low self-esteem, but not high
self-esteem, people. Third, it demonstrates how fluidly and flexibly the calibration of the risk regulation system shifts to accommodate the immediacy of the threat and the strength of connectedness and self-protection goals.2

A Preliminary Look: Self-Esteem and Goal Contingency
If the risk regulation system operates as hypothesized, low and
high self-esteem people should put different weight on pursuing
connectedness and self-protection goals within their relationships.
Their goal pursuits should also be differentially sensitive to ongo-

ing relationship circumstance. Specifically, greater relationship
duration should predict heightened connectedness desires for both.
However, such evidence of a partner’s continued availability
should dampen self-protection concerns only for highs. In this
correlational study, we modeled our measures of connectedness
and self-protection goals after measures of promotion and prevention goals developed by Lockwood, Jordan, and Kunda (2002).
The measure of connectedness goals tapped people’s desire to
nurture and focus on positive experiences in the relationship, such
as thinking of fun things to do together—a motivational precondition for connectedness. The measure of self-protection goals
tapped people’s preoccupation with avoiding negative experiences
in the relationship, such as trying to minimize conflicts—a motivational precondition for self-protection (Gable, 2005). Defining
connectedness and self-protection goals in this way parallels measures of friendship approach and avoidance goals, which are defined as the desire to approach positive relational outcomes and
avoid negative relational outcomes, respectively (Elliot et al.,
2006).

Method
Participants
One hundred twenty-seven undergraduates currently involved in
exclusive dating relationships completed a short questionnaire in
exchange for extra credit toward their introductory psychology
class. The relationships averaged 13.9 (SD ⫽ 11.7) months in
length.

Procedure
Participants completed a short questionnaire for extra credit
following an in-class examination. It contained demographic questions (e.g., age, relationship status, length) and measures of selfesteem, connectedness goals, and self-protection goals among fillers.

Measures
Self-esteem. The 10-item Rosenberg (1965) scale (␣ ⫽ .89)
tapped global feelings of self-worth (e.g., “I feel like a person of
worth, at least on an equal basis with others”). Participants responded to these items on 7-point scales (1 ⫽ strongly disagree,
7 ⫽ strongly agree).
Connectedness goals. This seven-item scale (␣ ⫽ .88) tapped
people’s desire or wish to develop and focus on the positive and
desirable aspects of their relationship (e.g., “I often think about
how I will achieve my goals for maintaining a satisfying relationship”; “When I think about the future of my relationship, I think
most about the good things that might happen”; “I am always
trying to think of new things my partner and I can do together”).
2

We focused on the behavioral output of the risk regulation system—the
intention to risk interdependence—in all of the experiments. This focus
allowed us to best examine when activated connectedness goals are fulfilled or thwarted in the face of risk. Examination of the mediating
mechanisms (i.e., appraisal and signaling rules) presented in Figure 1
remains an important goal for the future.

RISK REGULATION

435

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Participants responded to these items on 9-point scales (1 ⫽ not at
all true, 9 ⫽ completely true).
Self-protection goals. This 10-item scale (␣ ⫽ .94) tapped
people’s preoccupation with avoiding negative, costly, or hurtful
experiences in their relationships (e.g., “I worry that I will do
something that creates problems in my relationship”; “I am anxious that I will fall short of my responsibilities and obligations to
my partner”; “When I think about the future of my relationship, I
think most about the bad things that might happen”). Participants
responded to these items on 9-point scales (1 ⫽ not at all true, 9 ⫽
completely true).3

Results
Do low and high self-esteem people place different weight on
the pursuit of connectedness as opposed to self-protection goals?
Are these pursuits also differentially sensitive to relationship duration (and, thus, differentially sensitive to continued evidence of
their partner’s availability)? To examine these questions, we conducted two regression analyses.

Connectedness Goals
In the first analysis, we predicted the pursuit of connectedness
goals from the centered main effects of self-esteem and relationship length (entered on the first step) and the interaction term
(entered on the second step). As expected, people with higher
self-esteem reported stronger desires to focus on the positive,
connectedness-promoting aspects of their relationships, ␤ ⫽ .18,
sr2 ⫽ .03, t(124) ⫽ 2.03, p ⬍ .05. People in longer term relationships also reported stronger connectedness goals, ␤ ⫽ .19, sr2 ⫽
.04, t(124) ⫽ 2.16, p ⬍ .05. The interaction was not significant,
␤ ⫽ ⫺.098, sr2 ⫽ .01, t(123) ⫽ ⫺1.12. This suggests that greater
relationship duration and greater objective evidence of the partner’s availability generally promote the desire to focus on the
positive aspects of the relationship.

Self-Protection Goals
In the second regression analysis, we predicted the pursuit of
self-protection goals from self-esteem and relationship length (entered on the first step) and the interaction term (entered on the
second step). As expected, people with lower self-esteem reported
greater preoccupation with avoiding negative, hurtful experiences,
␤ ⫽ ⫺.29, sr2 ⫽ .08, t(124) ⫽ ⫺3.40, p ⬍ .001. The main effect
of relationship length was not significant, ␤ ⫽ ⫺.05, sr2 ⫽ .00,
t(124) ⬍ 1. However, the Global Self-Esteem ⫻ Relationship
Length interaction was significant, ␤ ⫽ ⫺.22, sr2 ⫽ .05, t(123) ⫽
⫺2.54, p ⬍ .05. Following the procedures recommended by Aiken
and West (1991), we then decomposed this interaction into the
simple effects of relationship length for participants relatively low
and relatively high in self-esteem (one standard deviation below
and above the mean, respectively). Figure 2 illustrates the predicted scores. As expected, greater relationship length predicted
less focus on the negative for participants relatively high in selfesteem, ␤ ⫽ ⫺.27, sr2 ⫽ .04, t(123) ⫽ ⫺2.21, p ⬍ .05. An
opposite but not significant effect of relationship length emerged
for people relatively low in self-esteem, ␤ ⫽ .14, sr2 ⫽ .01,
t(123) ⫽ 1.23.

Figure 2. The relationship contingencies of self-protection goals.

Discussion
This preliminary study provided encouraging support for the
hypothesized operation of a risk regulation system. First, relative
to people low in self-esteem, highs reported stronger chronic
desires to promote their relationship’s strengths and less chronic
concern about avoiding and preventing negativity. Second, goal
pursuits were differentially contingent on relationship circumstance. Greater objective evidence of a partner’s availability predicted heightened connectedness desires for low and high selfesteem people. However, only high self-esteem people were able
to set aside self-protection concerns as their relationships endured
and provided greater objective reason to trust their partner. These
data suggest that the risk regulation system is differentially calibrated as a function of self-esteem: Experiences that foster connectedness goals are not sufficient to lessen self-protection concerns among low self-esteem people.

Experiment 1: Interpersonal Risk and Implicit Goal
Activation
In Experiment 1, we examined whether the external reality of
interpersonal risk automatically activates connectedness goals
(Path A in Figure 1). We manipulated the perceived risks inherent
in the external interpersonal world by asking participants to describe a time when a significant other hurt or disappointed them.
We then measured goal activation using a lexical decision task.
Using this implicit measure allowed us to see whether risk primes
connectedness without people’s conscious awareness or control.
As active goals increase the cognitive accessibility of goal-relevant
information (Aarts, Dijksterhuis, & De Vries, 2001; Shah, Friedman, & Kruglanski, 2002), we expected high and even low selfesteem participants primed with risk to identify words associated
with seeking connection more quickly. We did not expect to see as
strong evidence of self-protection goal activation on this task
3
We derived the connectedness and self-protection scales from a larger
battery of items. Factor analyses of these items revealed two independent
factors. The items selected for the connectedness and self-protection scales
loaded highest on each factor. Responses on the resulting connectedness
and self-protection scales were not correlated, r(131) ⫽ .07.

MURRAY, DERRICK, LEDER, AND HOLMES

436

because risks external to the relationship activate self-protection
goals primarily indirectly, through the activation of connectedness
goals (Path C).

Method

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Participants
Ninety-four undergraduates who were native English speakers
and currently involved in exclusive dating relationships participated in exchange for credit in their introductory psychology class.
Six participants were eliminated for failing to follow instructions
for the autobiographical recall task and for being extreme outliers
on age, leaving a total sample of 89 (61 men). Participants were
19.1 years old on average (SD ⫽ 1.47), and they were in relationships averaging 13.9 months (SD ⫽ 12.2) in length.

Procedure
On arrival at the laboratory, participants were told that the
experiment examined interpersonal life experiences. All participants then completed a short background questionnaire that included basic demographic questions (e.g., age, gender, ethnicity,
fluency in English) and the Rosenberg (1965) self-esteem scale.
Participants randomly assigned to the general interpersonal risk or
experimental condition then provided a written description of a
time when they felt intensely disappointed, hurt, or let down by
someone close to them. Participants were instructed to describe
both what happened and how they felt about the experience at the
time in detail. Participants indicated these episodes involved good
friends (14%), best friends (20%), family members (16%), past
romantic partners (32%), or the current romantic partner (14%).4
Participants in the control condition described their commute to
campus.
All participants then completed the lexical decision task. Participants were seated in front of a computer and were instructed to
indicate whether each target stimulus that appeared was a word or
a nonword (by pressing the appropriate key). Participants were
encouraged to respond as quickly as they could without making
errors. The task contained 250 trials (125 words and 125 nonwords). The target words fell into three categories: (a) 32 words
tapping connectedness goals (e.g., vow, hug, kiss, join, want, grow,
hope, rely, faith, trust), (b) 10 words tapping self-protection goals
(e.g., retreat, protect, defense, caution, careful, prevent, watchful),
and (c) 25 words tapping hostility (e.g., oppose, condemn, angry,
blame, hate, annoy, accuse). (We included the hostility words to
provide an implicit measure of threat severity.) To distinguish the
activation of connectedness (or self-protection) goals from the
activation of positive or negative affect, we also included 15
positive and 15 negative noninterpersonal words (i.e., examples of
fruits and insects, respectively). The remaining words were fillers.
We created the nonwords by changing the last letter of a word
matched in length to each target word in a way that turned it into
a nonword. The words and nonwords were presented randomly,
and reaction times (in milliseconds) were recorded. Participants
then completed some filler measures and a manipulation check
assessing feelings of interpersonal vulnerability. All participants
were then probed for suspicion, debriefed, and thanked for their
participation.5

Measures
Interpersonal vulnerability. This 13-item measure (␣ ⫽ .90)
asked participants to indicate how recalling the episode made them
feel now (e.g., happy, angry, hurt, betrayed, included, rejected,
disappointed). Participants responded on 7-point scales (1 ⫽ not at
all, 7 ⫽ very). Positive items were reverse-scored in computing the
overall score such that higher scores reflected greater feelings of
interpersonal angst or vulnerability.

Results
Was thinking of a time when a significant other disappointed or
hurt them threatening enough to elicit participants’ perceptions of
risk? To examine this question, we conducted a regression analysis
predicting interpersonal vulnerability from the centered main effects of self-esteem, experimental condition (i.e., 1 ⫽ risk prime,
0 ⫽ control), and the Self-Esteem ⫻ Condition interaction. This
analysis revealed significant main effects for global self-esteem,
␤ ⫽ ⫺.26, sr2 ⫽ .07, t(85) ⫽ ⫺3.38, p ⬍ .001, and experimental
condition, ␤ ⫽ .67, sr2 ⫽ .44, t(85) ⫽ 8.60, p ⬍ .001. The
interaction was not significant, ␤ ⫽ ⫺.07, sr2 ⫽ .00, t(84) ⬍ 1. As
expected, participants primed to think of an interpersonal disappointment reported feeling significantly more hurt, rejected, and
disappointed about the incident (M ⫽ 4.14) than did control
participants (M ⫽ 2.38).
Did interpersonal risk make the construct of seeking connection
more accessible, suggesting the activation of a goal (Aarts et al.,
2001; Shah et al., 2002)? We first subjected reaction times to both
words and nonwords to a logarithmic transformation (Fazio,
1990). Within each word category, we then averaged response
times for correct responses made within 3,000 ms (i.e., “yes” for
actual words, and “no” for nonwords). Next, we conducted a series
of three-step hierarchical regression analyses predicting reaction
times to connectedness, self-protection, and hostility-related
words. In the first step, we entered centered responses to nonwords
and similarly valenced noninterpersonal words (i.e., fruit words for
connectedness, insect words for self-protection and hostilityrelated words) to control for individual differences in reaction time
and responses to affectively similar words, respectively. Next, we
entered the centered main effects of experimental condition and
self-esteem. We entered the Condition ⫻ Self-Esteem interaction
4

In this experiment (and all subsequent experiments utilizing the interpersonal risk prime), we found parallel findings when we omitted those
participants who described an incident involving their current romantic
partner. Thus, it seems reasonable to assume that the observed effects do
indeed reflect the effects of making risk in the more external interpersonal
world salient.
5
We selected the connectedness and self-protection words on the basis
of word ratings provided by undergraduate psychology students. The
connectedness words received relatively high ratings on the dimensions of
familiarity and “the extent to which the word captures the idea of increasing one’s sense of closeness or connection to another person” and relatively
low ratings on the dimension of “being cautious or wanting to stop
something bad from happening.” The opposite was the case for the selfprotection words. Hostility words received relatively high ratings on the
dimension “the extent to which the word captures the idea of maintaining
some separation or distance between oneself and another person” and
relatively low ratings on the other dimensions.

RISK REGULATION

437

Table 1
Summary of Regression Analyses in Experiment 1
Nonwordsa

Valence controla

Self-Esteem ⫻
Conditionc

Conditionb

Dependent measure

␤

sr2

t

␤

sr2

t

␤

sr2

t

␤

sr2

t

␤

sr2

t

Connectedness words
Self-protection words
Hostility words

.51
.46
.37

.12
.11
.08

6.45**
4.86**
4.43**

.42
.37
.52

.08
.07
.14

5.30**
3.91**
6.14**

⫺.02
⫺.05
⫺.06

.00
.00
.00

⬍1
⬍1
⬍1

⫺.11
.00
⫺.04

.01
.00
.00

⫺2.05*
⬍1
⬍1

.09
.09
⫺.01

.00
.00
.00

1.10
⬍1
⬍1

a
The error terms for the ts are based on 86 degrees of freedom.
the ts are based on 83 degrees of freedom.
*
p ⬍ .05. ** p ⬍ .01.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Self-esteemb

b

The error terms for the ts are based on 84 degrees of freedom.

on the final step. Table 1 contains the standardized betas, semipartial correlations (effect size), and t values that resulted from
these analyses. We discuss only the index that revealed significant
effects involving condition for brevity.6

Connectedness Words
The analysis predicting response times to connectedness words
yielded a significant main effect for condition. As expected, participants primed with the risks of interdependence were quicker to
identify connectedness words (M ⫽ 762.11) than were controls
(M ⫽ 795.01).

Experiment 2: Interpersonal Risk and Behavioral
Intentions
Experiment 1 suggested that making the general risks of interdependence salient automatically activates connectedness goals.
Does this indirect activation of connectedness goals then trigger
self-protection goals and the operation of the control system—a
corrective system that intervenes between goal activation and
execution? If it does, priming interpersonal risk should have different effects on the behavioral intentions of low and high selfesteem people. People with high self-esteem should intend to act
on the basis of heightened desires for connection, risking greater
interdependence within their current dating relationship. However,

The error terms for

people with low self-esteem should be more cautious, resisting
interdependence despite the goal of connecting. We designed
Experiment 2 to examine these hypotheses. We asked experimental participants to describe a time when a significant other hurt or
disappointed them. We then measured people’s desire to connect
to the partner and focus on the positive aspects of their relationship
and their intention to behave in ways that might actually fulfill
such goals. To do this, we developed two new measures of people’s intention to enter specific risky relationship situations—
concrete situations that diagnose a partner’s motives by affording
the partner the opportunity to behave selflessly or selfishly
(Kelley, 1979).

Discussion
Supporting the appetitive link in the risk regulation system,
situations that highlight the risks of depending on another seem to
activate the goal of seeking connection. People primed to think of
a time when a significant other disappointed them were quicker to
identify words associated with seeking connection in the lexical
decision task (relative to control participants). Impressively, this
effect is opposite to what one might expect on the basis of a
semantic priming effect, and it emerged regardless of people’s
chronic self-esteem level. However, people’s greater speed in
recognizing connectedness words in response to risk might simply
reflect the activation of a schema rather than a goal per se (Mikulincer & Shaver, 2003). Elliot and Freyer (in press) argued that
behavioral intentions toward a goal object are elemental to goals
and, thus, basic to demonstrating their existence. Accordingly, we
obtained direct measures of behavioral intentions to approach or
avoid situations of dependence in subsequent experiments.

c

Method
Participants
Ninety-two undergraduates involved in exclusive dating relationships participated in exchange for credit in their introductory
psychology class. Eleven participants were eliminated for failing
to follow the instructions for the autobiographical recall task,
leaving a total sample of 81 (37 men).7 Participants were 19.6
years old on average (SD ⫽ 2.09). They were involved in relationships averaging 19.4 months in length (SD ⫽ 13.6).

Procedure
On arriving at the laboratory, participants were told they would
be participating in two short experiments, the first on autobiographical recall and the second on interpersonal relationships. All
participants then completed a short background questionnaire on
computer that contained basic demographic questions (e.g., gender, age, relationship length) and the Rosenberg (1965) self-esteem
scale. Participants randomly assigned to the general interpersonal
risk condition then described a time when a significant other hurt
or disappointed them. Participants in the self-disappointment condition described a time when they hurt, let down, or disappointed
6
We did not find any replicable main or moderating effects of gender
across the experiments. Consequently, we collapse across gender in reporting the results.
7
The majority of these participants were in the self-disappointment
condition, and they wrote about a time when somebody else hurt them
(rather than describing a time when they personally hurt someone else).

MURRAY, DERRICK, LEDER, AND HOLMES

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

438

someone else. (We included this condition to determine whether
risk regulation dynamics are more pronounced when the actions of
others control one’s fate, as we would expect.) The stories provided in the experimental conditions involved good friends (8%),
best friends (24%), family (20%), the current romantic partner
(30%), and past romantic partners (18%). Participants in the control condition described their commute to campus. All participants
then proceeded to the purported second study and answered a
series of computer-administered questions about their current romantic relationships. The dependent measures were mixed among
filler items. Specifically, participants completed the measures of
connectedness (␣ ⫽ .83) and self-protection goals (␣ ⫽ .86)
utilized in the correlational study. They then completed a measure
of their willingness to enter interdependent situations, a measure of
the priority they put on interdependent activities, and measures of
general life promotion and prevention goals. The final measure
indexed mood. Participants were then probed for suspicion and
debriefed.

Measures
Entering interdependent situations. This 17-item scale (␣ ⫽
.89) tapped people’s willingness to put themselves in situations of
interdependence with their partner, including situations involving
support seeking (e.g., “distract me from worries when I’m under
stress,” “give me advice about problems”), decision making (e.g.,
“make choices for me,” “make decisions about things that affect
me,” “consider my needs when he/she makes decisions about
his/her life”), and soliciting partner sacrifices (e.g., “put me before
his/her friends,” “make my needs as important as his/her needs”).
Participants indicated how willing they would be to ask their
partner for the things specified, using 7-point scales (1 ⫽ not at all
willing, 7 ⫽ very willing).
Prioritizing interdependent activities. This 15-item scale (␣ ⫽
.67) tapped people’s willingness to prioritize activities that increase interdependence (e.g., “making my partner happy,” “getting
my partner involved in all aspects of my life,” “telling my partner
everything about myself,” “changing myself to make a better fit
with my partner,” “making sure I don’t change who I am” [reversed], “making sure I can still do the things I like to do”
[reversed]). Participants indicated how actively they were pursuing
each of these concrete activities using a 7-point scale (1 ⫽ not at
all actively, 7 ⫽ extremely actively). Activities that could detract

from interdependence were reverse-scored such that higher scores
reflected greater interdependence.
General promotion goals. This five-item (␣ ⫽ .85) scale,
adapted from Lockwood et al. (2002), indexed people’s general
desire to pursue and focus on positive life outcomes.
General prevention goals. This five-item scale (␣ ⫽ .71),
adapted from Lockwood et al. (2002), indexed people’s general
desire to prevent or avoid negative life outcomes.
Mood. This nine-item scale (␣ ⫽ .87) assessed current mood
(e.g., happy, angry, ashamed, proud, sad). Participants responded
to these items on 7-point scales (1 ⫽ not at all, 7 ⫽ very). Negative
moods were reverse-scored such that higher overall scores reflected more positive mood.

Results
We expected the salience of interpersonal risk to again activate
connectedness goals regardless of people’s chronic self-esteem.
However, we expected only high self-esteem people to respond to
risk by seeking greater interdependence within their relationships.
We conducted hierarchical regression analyses predicting the dependent measures from (a) two dummy-coded contrasts for the
main effects of condition (each contrast compared one of the
experimental conditions against the control condition), the centered main effects of self-esteem, and (b) two multiplicative terms
tapping the interaction between self-esteem and each condition
contrast. Table 2 contains the predicted scores for participants
relatively low versus high in self-esteem (defined as one standard
deviation below and above the mean) in each condition. Table 3
contains the results of the regression analyses. We again discuss
only those measures that revealed significant effects involving the
experimental conditions for the sake of brevity.

Connectedness Goals
As Table 2 illustrates, the regression analysis predicting the
desire to promote and develop positive aspects of one’s current
dating relationship revealed the expected significant main effect of
the interpersonal risk prime. Participants primed to think of the
risks of depending on another (M ⫽ 7.01) reported significantly
greater desire to perceive and nurture the positive aspects of their
current dating relationship relative to control participants (M ⫽
5.72).

Table 2
Predicted Scores for the Self-Esteem ⫻ Condition Interactions in Experiment 2
Low self-esteem

High self-esteem

Dependent measure

Interpersonal
risk

Control

Selfdisappointment

Interpersonal
risk

Control

Selfdisappointment

Connectedness goals
Self-protection goals
Risking interdependence
Promotion goals
Prevention goals
Mood

6.83
4.56
0.00
6.41
4.89
4.97

5.60
4.70
⫺0.03
5.69
5.21
4.55

7.13
4.59
0.22
6.70
4.78
5.45

7.19
3.73
0.44
7.44
4.21
6.13

5.83
3.04
⫺0.40
7.09
4.47
5.95

5.94
3.40
⫺0.19
7.17
4.58
5.92

Note. Low self-esteem and high self-esteem refer to participants one standard deviation below and above the mean, respectively.

RISK REGULATION

439

Table 3
Summary of Regression Analyses in Experiment 2
Interpersonal
riska

Self-esteema

Self-Esteem ⫻
Riskb

Self-Esteem ⫻
Disappointmentb

Dependent measure

␤

sr2

t

␤

sr2

t

␤

sr2

t

␤

sr2

t

␤

sr2

t

Connectedness goals
Self-protection goals
Risking interdependence
General promotion goals
General prevention goals
Mood

.03
⫺.38
.03
.40
⫺.23
.52

.00
.15
.00
.16
.05
.27

⬍1
⫺3.65**
⬍1
3.92**
⫺2.06*
5.38**

.47
.09
.25
.19
⫺.10
.13

.18
.01
.05
.03
.01
.01

4.06**
⬍1
2.03*
1.69†
⬍1
1.24

.28
.04
.13
.19
⫺.06
.18

.06
.00
.01
.03
.00
.03

2.46*
⬍1
1.02
1.62
⬍1
1.69†

.03
.20
.35
⫺.10
.02
⫺.08

.00
.02
.05
.00
.00
.00

⬍1
1.17
1.98*
⬍1
⬍1
⬍1

⫺.21
.06
⫺.01
⫺.14
.08
⫺.17

.03
.00
.00
.01
.00
.02

⫺1.70†
⬍1
⬍1
⫺1.10
⬍1
⫺1.42

a

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Self-disappointmenta

†

The error terms for the ts are based on 77 degrees of freedom.
p ⬍ .10. * p ⬍ .05. ** p ⬍ .01.

b

The error terms for the ts are based on 75 degrees of freedom.

This analysis also revealed a significant main effect for the
self-disappointment prime and a marginally significant SelfEsteem ⫻ Self-Disappointment interaction. Following the procedures recommended by Aiken and West (1991), we then decomposed this interaction into the simple effects of selfdisappointment condition for participants relatively low and
relatively high in self-esteem (operationalized as one standard
deviation below and above the mean, respectively). As Table 2
illustrates, participants low in self-esteem reported stronger desires
to focus on the positive in their dating relationship when they
focused on a time they disappointed another (relative to controls),
␤ ⫽ .45, sr2 ⫽ .09, t(75) ⫽ 2.81, p ⬍ .01. The simple effect of
self-disappointment condition was not significant for highs, ␤ ⫽
.036, sr2 ⫽ .00, t(75) ⬍ 1.8

risk by reporting stronger desires to nurture and develop their
current dating relationship. However, only high self-esteem people
acted on the basis of stronger connectedness desires, actually
becoming more willing to put themselves in risky but
connectedness-increasing situations. Importantly, this latter effect
was specific to the interpersonal risk prime. We believe that the
comparative caution of low self-esteem people reflected the operation of a self-protectively calibrated risk regulation system. However, the null effects of condition for low self-esteem people
limited our ability to draw the conclusion that low self-esteem
people were actually executing self-protection goals in this situation. We designed Experiments 3 and 4 to provide stronger evidence that the desire to approach triggers a self-protectively calibrated risk regulation system for low self-esteem, but not high
self-esteem, people.

Willingness to Risk Interdependence Composite
We first created a composite measure tapping the intention to
risk increased interdependence (i.e., entering interdependent situations and prioritizing interdependent activities, each transformed
to a z score and then averaged; ␣ ⫽ .58). The regression analysis
predicting this composite revealed a significant main effect of
interpersonal risk and a significant Self-Esteem ⫻ Interpersonal
Risk interaction. As expected, participants high in self-esteem
responded to interpersonal risk (and the indirect activation of
connectedness goals) by reporting greater willingness to seek out
risky interdependent situations within their relationship, ␤ ⫽ .48,
sr2 ⫽ .10, t(75) ⫽ 2.89, p ⬍ .01. However, this simple effect was
not significant for lows, ␤ ⫽ .02, sr2 ⫽ .00, t(75) ⬍ 1.9

General Promotion Goals
The regression analysis predicting the general desire to promote
positive life outcomes revealed a marginal main effect for the
interpersonal risk prime. Participants primed to think of the risks of
depending on another reported stronger general desires to pursue
positive life outcomes (M ⫽ 6.93) relative to control participants
(M ⫽ 6.39).

Discussion
Further supporting the appetitive step in the risk regulation
system, people generally responded to the salience of interpersonal

Experiment 3: Approach Goals and Risk Regulation 1
If activating connectedness goals triggers self-protection goals
and the control system, implicitly priming the general goal of
approaching a desired state should have different effects on low
and high self-esteem people. Priming approach goals should trigger defensive attempts to distance among low self-esteem people
(because the prospect of being closer automatically triggers the
operation of a self-protectively calibrated control system). How8

The fact that low-esteem people reported stronger desires to focus on
the positive within their relationships when they were reminded of a time
when they disappointed another points to one possible way in which they
might stabilize their relationships against their more destructive behaviors.
Specifically, knowledge of their failures in other relationships may motivate lows to try to do better in the current one. Consistent with this logic,
low self-esteem people engage in reparative relationship behaviors provided those behaviors do not put them at any real risk of rejection (Murray
et al., 2007).
9
Low self-esteem participants reported greater willingness to risk interdependence than high self-esteem participants in the control condition.
Although this might seem counter to our theoretical model, this is not
surprising from our vantage point. Given heightened desires for social
connection (Leary, Tambor, Terdal, & Downs, 1995), low self-esteem
people likely want greater levels of interdependence in their relationships.
However, when the prospect of being hurt and vulnerable is salient, such
hopes seem to be quickly set aside (as our model would anticipate).

MURRAY, DERRICK, LEDER, AND HOLMES

440

Table 4
Predicted Scores for the Self-Esteem ⫻ Condition Interactions in Experiment 3
Low self-esteem

High self-esteem

Dependent measure

Generic approach

Control

Relationship approach

Generic approach

Control

Relationship approach

Closeness composite
State self-esteem

.38
5.53

.20
4.56

⫺.54
5.07

.02
6.15

.05
6.12

.20
6.42

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Note. Low self-esteem and high self-esteem refer to participants one standard deviation below and above the mean, respectively.

ever, priming approach goals should activate a congruent desire to
draw closer to the partner among highs. In Experiment 3, we
implicitly primed participants with the general goal of approaching
a desired state and then measured feelings of closeness to the
dating partner. We expected priming approach goals to diminish
subjective feelings of closeness to the partner for low self-esteem,
but not high self-esteem, people.

Method
Participants
One hundred sixteen undergraduates (44 men) involved in exclusive dating relationships participated in an online experiment.
Participants averaged 19.5 years in age (SD ⫽ 1.8), and they were
involved in relationships averaging 17.2 (SD ⫽ 14.4) months in
length.

circles representing the self and the partner best described how
close or connected they felt to their partner (Aron, Aron, Tudor, &
Nelson, 1991).
Closeness. This five-item scale (␣ ⫽ .95) tapped feelings of
connection to the partner (e.g., “I am closer to my partner than any
other person in my life,” “I feel extremely attached to my partner,”
“I would choose to spend time with my partner over anyone else
in my life”). Participants responded to these items on 9-point
scales (1 ⫽ not at all true, 9 ⫽ completely true).
State self-esteem. This three-item scale (␣ ⫽ .89) indexed
participants’ current feelings about themselves on 7-point bipolar
scales (i.e., bad about myself . . . good about myself, unhappy with
myself . . . happy with myself, rejected by others . . . accepted by
others).

Results
Procedure
An e-mail soliciting participation in an online experiment on
categorization and relationships was sent to multiple undergraduate LISTSERVs, and the study was posted on the sign-up system
for introductory psychology students. People who responded to the
announcement were then sent a link randomly assigning them to
one of the three experimental conditions. Participants first completed demographic questions and the Rosenberg (1965) selfesteem scale. Participants then completed an adaptation of Lockwood et al.’s (2002, Experiment 2) implicit goal priming task,
which we described as a pilot measure for a word-association test.
Across conditions, this task involved sorting 48 words into three
categories of related words (which participants had to discern).
Participants in the generic approach goal condition sorted words
that fell into the categories of approaching a desired state (e.g.,
strive, win, strengthen, accomplish, thrive, achieve, pursue,
pledge), cooking (e.g., roast, aromatic, sauté), and child care (e.g.
baby, bottle, infant, cradle). Participants in the relationship approach goal condition sorted generic and interpersonally oriented
words into the categories of approaching a desired state (e.g.,
encourage, hope, want, faith, devote, forgive, promise), cooking,
and child care.10 Control participants sorted words into the categories of music (e.g., guitar, opera), cooking, and child care.
Participants then completed measures of closeness and state selfesteem among fillers.

Measures
Inclusion of other in self. This one-item measure asked participants to indicate which of seven progressively overlapping

Did implicitly priming approach goals activate risk regulation
processes? We first created a composite measure of closeness
(inclusion of other in the self and closeness, each transformed to a
z score and then averaged; ␣ ⫽ .90). We then conducted hierarchical regression analyses predicting the dependent measures from
(a) two dummy-coded contrasts for the main effects of condition
(each contrast compared one of the approach prime conditions
against the control condition), the centered main effect of selfesteem, and (b) two multiplicative terms tapping the interaction
between self-esteem and each condition contrast. Table 4 contains
the predicted scores for participants relatively low versus high in
self-esteem in each condition. Table 5 contains the results of the
regression analyses.

Closeness Composite
The regression analysis predicting overall feelings of closeness
revealed only a significant Self-Esteem ⫻ Relationship Approach
Goal interaction. Decomposing this interaction revealed that people relatively low in self-esteem reacted to the goal of approaching
a desired state by diminishing their connection to their partner,
␤ ⫽ ⫺.40, sr2 ⫽ .06, t(110) ⫽ ⫺2.72, p ⬍ .01. An opposite, but
not significant, effect emerged for highs, ␤ ⫽ .08, sr2 ⫽ .00,
t(110) ⬍ 1.
10
We included both generic and relationship approach goal conditions
as we were uncertain whether the activation of risk regulation required
interpersonally themed approach goals.

RISK REGULATION

441

Table 5
Summary of Regression Analyses in Experiment 3
General
approacha

a

Self-esteem

Self-Esteem ⫻ General
Approachb

Relationship
approacha

Dependent measure

␤

sr2

t

␤

sr2

t

Closeness composite
State self-esteem

.11
.54

.01
.28

1.13
6.84**

.00
.19

.00
.02

⬍1
1.97*

␤
⫺.17
.18

sr2
.02
.02

t
⫺1.50
1.88†

␤

sr2

t

␤

sr2

⫺.06
⫺.20

.00
.02

⬍1
⫺1.91†

.32
⫺.06

.04
.00

a

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

The error terms for the ts are based on 112 and 110 degrees of freedom for closeness and state-self-esteem, respectively.
are based on 110 and 108 degrees of freedom for closeness and state-self-esteem, respectively.
†
p ⬍ .10. * p ⬍ .05. ** p ⬍ .01.

State Self-Esteem
The regression analysis predicting state self-esteem revealed a
marginally significant main effect for the relationship approach
prime, a significant main effect for the generic approach prime,
and a marginally significant Self-Esteem ⫻ Generic Approach
Prime interaction. Participants in the relationship approach prime
condition (M ⫽ 5.74) tended to feel better about themselves than
did participants in the control condition (M ⫽ 5.34). Low selfesteem participants in the generic approach prime condition also
reported feeling significantly better about themselves than did
controls, ␤ ⫽ .41, sr2 ⫽ .05, t(108) ⫽ 2.78, p ⬍ .01. This simple
effect was not significant for high self-esteem participants, ␤ ⫽
.02, sr2 ⫽ .00, t(108) ⬍ 1. Importantly, the Self-Esteem ⫻ Relationship Approach Goal interaction predicting closeness remained
significant when we controlled for state self-esteem, ␤ ⫽ .34,
sr2 ⫽ .05, t(107) ⫽ 2.72, p ⬍ .01.

Discussion
Experiment 3 suggested that implicitly priming the goal of
approaching a desired relationship state activates self-protective
corrective processes for low self-esteem, but not high self-esteem,
people. When primed with relationship approach goals, but not
generic ones, low self-esteem people actually reported feeling
significantly less close to their dating partner (relative to control
participants). This effect is directly opposite to what one might
expect on the basis of a semantic priming effect (and opposite to
the positive effect that the prime had on state self-esteem). However, we did not measure the activation of connectedness goals,
limiting our ability to argue that the prospect of approaching a
desired state in the relationship creates the experience of goal
conflict for low self-esteem, but not high self-esteem, people.

Experiment 4: Approach Goals and Risk Regulation 2
In Experiment 4, we primed both approach and avoidance goals
using the word categorization paradigm utilized in Experiment 3.
We then measured people’s implicit associations to their partner
and explicit reports of closeness. We expected low self-esteem
people, when primed with the generic goal of approaching a
desired state, to evidence the conflict they experience between
connectedness and self-protection. Specifically, we expected lows
to react more positively to the partner on the implicit task while
still disavowing feelings of closeness to the partner on the explicit

Self-Esteem ⫻
Relationship
Approachb

b

t
2.29*
⬍1

The error terms for the ts

measure. In contrast, we expected high self-esteem people primed
with approach to evidence congruent responses, reflecting the
operation of a risk regulation system that prioritizes connectedness
over self-protection.

Method
Participants
One hundred ten undergraduates involved in exclusive dating
relationships participated in exchange for credit in their introductory psychology class. Four participants were eliminated for failing
to follow instructions or lack of fluency in English, leaving a
sample of 106 (18 men). Participants averaged 18.9 years of age
(SD ⫽ 1.7).

Procedure
The experimenter told participants they would be participating
in a study on people’s thoughts and feelings about their relationships. Participants first completed a questionnaire that included
demographic questions (e.g., gender, age) and the Rosenberg
(1965) self-esteem scale.
Participants then completed practice trials for the implicit partner evaluation task. This measure (adapted from Dodgson &
Wood, 1998) tapped how quickly participants identified positive
and negative traits as characteristic of the partner (thus, faster
reaction times to positive traits and slower reaction times to
negative traits reflected more positive implicit evaluations). The
experimenter introduced this task as a categorization task. Participants were told that words would appear on the screen (one at a
time) and that they had to indicate whether each word, a person
descriptor such as warm or an object descriptor such as car, could
ever possibly be used to describe their partner (by pressing yes or
no keys). For the practice trials, they responded to 15 person
descriptors and 15 object descriptors. If participants responded
incorrectly on the practice trials, they received an error message
(e.g., responding “no” to warm or “yes” to car).
Participants then completed the implicit goal priming categorization task adapted from Lockwood et al. (2002). As in Experiment 3, participants in the generic approach goals condition sorted
words that fell into the categories of approaching a desired state,
cooking, and child care. (We utilized the generic prime to provide
a convergent replication of the effects we observed with the
relationship approach goals prime in Experiment 3.) Participants in

MURRAY, DERRICK, LEDER, AND HOLMES

442

Table 6
Predicted Scores for the Self-Esteem ⫻ Condition Interactions in Experiment 4
Low self-esteem

High self-esteem

Dependent measure

Generic approach

Control

Generic avoidance

Generic approach

Control

Generic avoidance

Positive implicit evaluations
Negative implicit evaluations
Closeness composite
General promotion goals
General prevention goals
Mood

850.90
955.19
⫺.44
7.12
4.74
4.97

894.80
1,015.16
.16
6.65
5.23
5.15

879.09
968.98
.09
6.36
5.17
5.57

839.87
898.07
.38
7.42
4.12
6.31

918.89
1,012.62
⫺.16
7.89
4.49
5.84

869.00
956.95
⫺.15
8.25
4.13
5.97

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Note. Low self-esteem and high self-esteem refer to participants one standard deviation below and above the mean, respectively.

the generic avoidance goals condition sorted words that fell into
the categories of avoiding a feared state (e.g., fail, pain, avert,
avoid, hesitate), cooking, and child care. (We included an avoidance goals prime to determine whether avoidance goals also activated the control system.) Participants in the control condition
sorted words that fell into the categories of music, cooking, and
child care.
All participants then completed the target trials for the implicit
partner evaluation measure. This measure was composed of 240
target trials (120 person-descriptor words and 120 objectdescriptor words). The target words of conceptual interest were 11
connectedness words (e.g., accepted, loved, respected, appreciated, wanted, connected, needed) and 38 positive interpersonal
trait words (e.g., competent, smart, creative, funny, attractive,
passionate, warm, forgiving, compassionate). We also included 7
positive mood words for control purposes (e.g., content, happy,
joyful). Although we assumed that the desire to connect to the
partner would be more likely to surface on quicker positive associations to the partner than on slower negative associations, we
also included 15 distance words (e.g., blamed, unloved, hostile,
distrusted), 38 negative traits words (e.g., thoughtless, selfish,
stubborn, dumb), and 7 negative mood words (e.g., angry, sad,
guilty). The remaining words were fillers. The words were presented in a random order for each participant, and reaction times
(in milliseconds) were recorded.11
All participants then completed the inclusion of other in the self
scale, the five-item closeness measure (␣ ⫽ .91) from Experiment
3, the nine-item mood measure from Experiment 2 (␣ ⫽ .86), and
the Lockwood et al. (2002) promotion (␣ ⫽ .80) and prevention
(␣ ⫽ .56) scales (included as potential checks on the manipulation
of approach and avoidance goals).

Results
Did priming the goal of approaching a desired state automatically activate connectedness goals, resulting in more positive,
implicit evaluations of the partner? Did low self-esteem people
react to heightened desires to connect by self-protectively disavowing feelings of closeness? To examine the first hypothesis, we
first subjected reaction times to each person and object word to a
logarithmic transformation (Fazio, 1990). Within each word category, we then averaged response times for correct responses made
within 3,000 ms. Next, we created composite measures of positive
and negative implicit evaluations by averaging response times to

the connectedness and positive trait words and to the distance and
negative trait words, respectively.
On the first step of the hierarchical regressions predicting these
composites, we entered reaction times to object words (to control
for individual differences in response times) and to same-valence
mood words (to control for reaction times to affectively similar
words). On the second step, we entered the centered main effects
of self-esteem and two dummy-coded contrasts representing the
effects of condition (each contrast compared one of the experimental conditions against the control). We entered the SelfEsteem ⫻ Condition contrast interaction terms in the final step.
The regressions predicting the composite measure of closeness
(inclusion of other in self and closeness, each transformed to a z
score and averaged; ␣ ⫽ .85), promotion goals, prevention goals,
and mood were parallel, except they omitted the covariates. Table
6 contains the predicted scores for participants relatively low and
high in self-esteem. Table 7 contains the results of the analyses.
We discuss only those measures that revealed significant effects
involving experimental condition for the sake of brevity.

Positive Implicit Evaluations
The regression analysis predicting positive implicit associations
to the partner revealed a significant main effect for the approach
goals prime. As expected, participants implicitly primed with the
generic goal of approaching a desired state (M ⫽ 845.38) were
quicker to associate their partner with desirable connectednesspromoting qualities than were controls (M ⫽ 906.85).

Closeness Composite
The analysis predicting the composite closeness measure revealed a significant Self-Esteem ⫻ Approach Goals Prime interaction. When primed with an approach goal, low self-esteem
participants actually reported feeling less close to their partner than
did controls, ␤ ⫽ ⫺.30, sr2 ⫽ .04, t(98) ⫽ ⫺1.92, p ⬍ .06. In
contrast, high self-esteem participants reported feeling closer to
their partner when primed with the goal of approaching a desired
state, ␤ ⫽ .27, sr2 ⫽ .03, t(98) ⫽ 1.67, p ⬍ .10.
11

As the task required “yes” responses to all person descriptors (as these
words could all conceivably be used to describe the partner in some
circumstance), reaction times to positive and negative words were not
confounded with “yes” versus “no” responses (Dodgson & Wood, 1998).

RISK REGULATION

443

Table 7
Summary of Regression Analyses in Experiment 4
Generic
approacha

Self-esteema

Self-Esteem ⫻
Approachb

Generic
avoidancea

Self-Esteem ⫻
Avoidanceb

Dependent measure

␤

sr2

t

␤

sr2

t

␤

sr2

t

␤

sr2

t

␤

sr2

t

Positive implicit evaluationsc
Negative implicit evaluationsd
Closeness composite
General promotion goals
General prevention goals
Mood

⫺.01
⫺.09
.01
.50
⫺.32
.37

.00
.01
.00
.25
.10
.13

⬍1
⬍1
⬍1
5.81**
⫺3.42**
3.96**

⫺.15
⫺.11
⫺.02
⫺.01
⫺.16
.07

.02
.01
.00
.00
.02
.00

⫺2.21*
⫺1.30
⬍1
⬍1
⫺1.51
⬍1

⫺.06
.04
⫺.04
.04
⫺.09
.11

.00
.00
.00
.00
.01
.01

⬍1
⬍1
⬍1
⬍1
⬍1
⬍1

⫺.03
⫺.02
.31
⫺.21
.03
.16

.00
.00
.06
.03
.00
.02

⬍1
⬍1
2.56*
⫺2.05*
⬍1
1.34

⫺.07
.00
.02
.15
⫺.06
⫺.07

.00
.00
.00
.01
.00
.00

⬍1
⬍1
⬍1
1.4
⬍1
⬍1

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

a

The error terms for the ts are based on 98 degrees of freedom for positive implicit evaluations and 97 degrees of freedom for negative implicit evaluations.
The error terms for the ts are based on 96 degrees of freedom for positive implicit evaluations and 95 degrees of freedom for negative implicit evaluations.
c
The covariates, entered on Step 1, predicted positive implicit evaluations both for object words, ␤ ⫽ .43, sr2 ⫽ .15, t(101) ⫽ 6.55, p ⬍ 01, and for positive
mood words, ␤ ⫽ .52, sr2 ⫽ .21, t(101) ⫽ 7.87, p ⬍ .01. d The covariates, entered on Step 1, predicted negative implicit evaluations both for object words,
␤ ⫽ .23, sr2 ⫽ .09, t(100) ⫽ 2.71, p ⬍ .01, and for negative mood words, ␤ ⫽ .52, sr2 ⫽ .16, t(100) ⫽ 5.98, p ⬍ .01.
*
p ⬍ .05. ** p ⬍ .01.
b

General Promotion Goals
The regression analysis predicting the manipulation check for
promotion goals revealed a significant Self-Esteem ⫻ Approach
Goals Prime interaction. Low self-esteem participants primed with
approach goals reported stronger promotion goals relative to controls, although the simple effect was not significant, ␤ ⫽ .19, sr2 ⫽
.01, t(98) ⫽ 1.45. However, the opposite, also nonsignificant,
effect emerged for people high in self-esteem, ␤ ⫽ ⫺.19, sr2 ⫽
.01, t(98) ⫽ ⫺1.42.12

salience by seeking greater connection to their partner. In Experiment 5, we manipulated both self-regulatory strength and general
interpersonal risk. We then measured connectedness and selfprotection goals, the willingness to risk interdependence, and
feelings of dependence on the partner. We expected that when the
risks of depending on others were salient and the capacity to
regulate risk was usurped, lows would behave like highs—striving
to fulfill needs for connection by seeking out risky, interdependent
situations within their relationships.

Method

Discussion
When implicitly primed with the goal of approaching a desired
state, people were quicker to associate the partner with desirable
qualities, the types of qualities that would allow approaching the
partner to satisfy connectedness goals. However, wanting to seek
out the partner automatically appeared to trigger a self-protectively
calibrated risk regulation system for people low in self-esteem.
They again disavowed feelings of connection to the partner on the
explicit measure of closeness when the prospect of getting closer
to the partner was primed. In contrast, high self-esteem people
realized connectedness goals, reporting increased feelings of closeness to their partner when the goal of approaching desired states
was primed.13

Experiment 5: Self-Depletion Usurps Risk Regulation
The results suggested that the activation of approach/
connectedness goals triggers the signature style underlying people’s risk regulation system. Do the dynamics we observed reflect
the operation of an executive control system— one that typically
overrides connectedness goals for low self-esteem, but not high
self-esteem, people? Muraven and Baumeister (2000) argued that
overcoming an activated goal—an act of self-control— consumes
executive or self-regulatory strength. If correction requires executive strength, diminishing this resource should result in low and
high self-esteem people reacting similarly to risk. For both, a prior
act of self-control should preempt the activation of the control
system. Consequently, they should both react to interpersonal risk

Participants
One hundred seventeen undergraduates involved in exclusive
dating relationships participated in exchange for course credit.
Seven participants failed to follow the instructions for the autobiographical recall task, leaving a total sample of 110 (71 men).
Their average age was 19.6 years (SD ⫽ 2.5). They were involved
in relationships averaging 21.3 months in length (SD ⫽ 25.6).

Procedure
The experimenter told participants they would be participating
in two short, unrelated experiments on interpersonal perception,
the first examining general perceptual processes and the second
examining specific relationship perceptions. All participants then
completed a short background questionnaire that included demographic questions (e.g., gender, age, relationship length) and the
Rosenberg (1965) self-esteem scale. Participants randomly assigned to the general interpersonal risk condition then described a
12

The weak results on the manipulation checks are perhaps not surprising given that the prime was implicit in nature and the dependent measure
was explicit in nature.
13
Intriguingly, the general avoidance prime did not have any effect.
Though this might be a function of the prime itself, it also raises the
possibility that distancing effects require the coactivation of connectedness
goals—a possibility we returned to in Experiment 8.

MURRAY, DERRICK, LEDER, AND HOLMES

444

Table 8
Predicted Scores for Low and High Self-Esteem Participants in Each Condition in Experiment 5
Low self-esteem

High self-esteem

Dependent measure

Risk
depleted

No risk
depleted

Risk not
depleted

No risk not
depleted

Risk
depleted

No risk
depleted

Risk not
depleted

No risk not
depleted

Connectedness goals
Self-protection goals
Risking interdependence
Dependence

7.05
3.61
.29
1.13

7.04
4.88
⫺.10
1.97

6.05
4.13
⫺.32
1.88

6.46
4.08
.05
1.68

7.56
3.81
.54
2.16

6.38
2.92
⫺.11
1.82

7.36
2.98
⫺.07
1.88

6.17
2.83
⫺.37
2.25

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Note. Low self-esteem and high self-esteem refer to participants one standard deviation below and above the mean, respectively.

time when a significant other hurt or disappointed them. Participants in the control condition described their commute to school.
The experimenter then introduced the self-regulation depletion
manipulation developed by Baumeister, Bratslavsky, Muraven,
and Tice (1998). All participants watched a video of a woman
being interviewed by an off-camera interviewer. Throughout the
course of the video, one-syllable words appeared at the bottom of
the screen for 10 s each. In the self-regulation depletion condition,
participants were warned about the words, and they were instructed not to read or look at any of the words. Participants in the
not-depleted control condition received no warning and no instructions regarding the words. All participants then completed the
dependent measures, including the measures of connectedness
goals (␣ ⫽ .86), self-protection goals (␣ ⫽ .84), entering interdependent situations (␣ ⫽ .84), prioritizing interdependent activities
(␣ ⫽ .61), and dependence on the partner.

Materials
Dependence on partner. This one-item scale asked participants to imagine they were at the center of a circle depicted and
then to place their partner on a series of progressively distant
circles to indicate how much more they relied on their partner to
feel happy and connected (relative to other important people in
their lives). Selecting a closer circle (i.e., a lower score) indicated
greater dependence on the partner relative to others.

Results
Did diminishing executive control usurp the hypothesized control system? To examine this question, we conducted a series of
hierarchical regression analyses predicting each dependent measure from (a) the centered main effects of self-esteem, an effectcoded contrast for interpersonal risk condition (risk ⫽ 1, control ⫽
⫺1), and an effect-coded contrast for self-depletion condition
(depleted ⫽ 1, not depleted⫽ ⫺1); (b) all possible two-way
interactions; and (c) the three-way interaction. Table 8 contains the
predicted scores for participants relatively low and high in selfesteem in each condition. Tables 9 (standardized betas and t
values) and 10 (effect sizes) contain the results of regression
analyses. We discuss only those measures that revealed significant
effects involving the experimental manipulations.

Connectedness Goals
The regression analysis predicting connectedness goals revealed
a marginal main effect for interpersonal risk that replicated prior

experiments. However, this latter effect was qualified by a significant interaction with self-esteem. Only people relatively high in
self-esteem responded to the salience of interpersonal risk by
reporting stronger desires to pursue and focus on the positive
aspects of their relationships (M ⫽ 7.46) relative to controls (M ⫽
6.28), ␤ ⫽ .42, sr2 ⫽ .08, t(102) ⫽ 3.12, p ⬍ .01. This simple
effect was not significant for lows, ␤ ⫽ ⫺.07, sr2 ⫽ .00, t(102) ⬍ 1.

Self-Protection Goals
The analysis predicting self-protection goals revealed a significant Self-Esteem ⫻ Interpersonal Risk ⫻ Self-Depletion interaction. Decomposing this interaction (Aiken & West, 1991) revealed
a marginally significant Risk ⫻ Self-Depletion interaction for low
self-esteem, ␤ ⫽ ⫺.22, sr2 ⫽ .02, t(102) ⫽ ⫺1.74, p ⬍ .09, but not
high self-esteem, ␤ ⫽ .13, sr2 ⫽ .01, t(102) ⫽ 1.02, participants.
When executive strength was depleted, low self-esteem people
primed with risk reported less preoccupation with avoiding rejection and negativity, ␤ ⫽ ⫺.44, sr2⫽ .04, t(102) ⫽ ⫺2.44, p ⬍ .05.
The simple effect of risk was not significant when executive
strength was intact, ␤ ⫽ .02, sr2⫽ .00, t(102) ⬍ 1.

Willingness to Risk Interdependence Composite
The regression analysis predicting the willingness to risk interdependence composite (entering and prioritizing interdependent
situations, each transformed to a z score and averaged; ␣ ⫽ .61)
revealed the expected, albeit marginally significant, Interpersonal
Risk ⫻ Self-Depletion interaction. Figure 3 presents the predicted
scores. When executive strength was depleted, participants exposed to interpersonal risk reported significantly greater willingness to seek out risky interdependent situations, ␤ ⫽ .30, sr2⫽ .06,
t(102) ⫽ 2.25, p ⬍ .05. The simple effect of interpersonal risk was
not significant when executive strength was intact, ␤ ⫽ ⫺.03,
sr2⫽ .00, t(102) ⬍ 1.14

Dependence on the Partner
The regression analysis predicting people’s dependence on the
partner for happiness and a sense of connection to others revealed
a significant Self-Esteem ⫻ Interpersonal Risk Salience ⫻ Self14

We were not expecting the simple effect of risk to be significant in the
nondepletion conditions because low and high self-esteem participants
respond to the salience of rejection in opposite ways (Murray et al., 1998,
2002).

RISK REGULATION

445

Table 9
Summary of Regression Analyses in Experiment 5
Self-esteema

Riska

Selfdepletiona

Self-Esteem
⫻ Riskb

Self-Esteem ⫻
Depletionb

Risk ⫻
Depletionb

Three-wayc

Dependent measure

␤

t

␤

t

␤

t

␤

t

␤

t

␤

t

␤

t

Connectedness goals
Self-protection goals
Risking interdependence
Dependence

.07
⫺.40
.03
.13

⬍1
⫺4.43**
⬍1
1.27

.18
.01
.13
⫺.05

1.85†
⬍1
1.40
⬍1

.16
.14
.17
⫺.03

1.74†
1.53
1.80†
⬍1

.24
.22
.13
.10

2.54*
2.42*
1.33
⬍1

⫺.11
.06
.06
.04

⫺1.11
⬍1
⬍1
⬍1

.04
⫺.05
.16
⫺.04

⬍1
⬍1
1.72†
⬍1

⫺.04
.18
⫺.06
.21

⬍1
1.98*
⬍1
2.04*

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

a

The error terms for the ts are based on 106 degrees of freedom for the measures of connectedness goals, self-protection goals, and risking interdependence
and on 102 degrees of freedom for the measure of dependence. b The error terms for the ts are based on 103 degrees of freedom for the measures of
connectedness goals, self-protection goals, and risking interdependence and on 99 degrees of freedom for the measure of dependence. c The error terms
for the ts are based on 102 degrees of freedom for the measures of connectedness goals, self-protection goals, and risking interdependence and on 98 degrees
of freedom for the measure of dependence.
†
p ⬍ .10. * p ⬍ .05. ** p ⬍ .01.

Depletion interaction. Decomposing this interaction (Aiken &
West, 1991) revealed a marginally significant Interpersonal
Risk ⫻ Self-Depletion interaction for low self-esteem, ␤ ⫽ ⫺.25,
sr2⫽ .03, t(98) ⫽ ⫺1.72, p ⬍ .09, but not high self-esteem, ␤ ⫽
.17, sr2⫽ .01, t(98) ⫽ 1.20, participants. When executive strength
was depleted, low self-esteem participants primed with risk reported relying more on their partner for a sense of happiness and
interpersonal connection, ␤ ⫽ ⫺.40, sr2⫽ .03, t(98) ⫽ ⫺1.90, p ⫽
.06. An opposite, but not significant, effect of risk emerged when
executive strength was intact, ␤ ⫽ .10, sr2⫽ .00, t(98) ⬍ 1.

Discussion
When executive control was usurped, low self-esteem people
responded to the general risks of depending on another by seeking
deeper connection to their partner. Like highs, they reacted to the
risk prime by reporting greater willingness to seek out risky
interdependent situations within their dating relationships. Depleted lows also reported less concern with self-protection and
greater dependence on their partner when interpersonal risk was
salient—the type of situation that typically triggers self-protective
attempts to distance from the partner (Murray et al., 2002). Experiment 5 thus provided good initial evidence that risk regulation
does indeed involve an executive control system. However, our
capacity to draw the conclusion that risk regulation generally
consumes executive strength was limited by the fact that the
effects were not as robust for high self-esteem people. We utilized
a different manipulation of executive strength in Experiment 6 in
an effort to redress this limitation.

Experiment 6: Cognitive Busyness Usurps Risk
Regulation
In this experiment, we diminished executive strength by imposing an additional cognitive load on participants. Participants in the
cognitively busy condition completed the dependent measures
while mentally rehearsing a long alphanumeric string (see Gilbert,
1989; Gilbert, Pelham, & Krull, 1988; Macrae et al., 1999). We
expected that when the risks of depending on others were salient
and the capacity to regulate risk was usurped, lows would behave
like highs—striving to fulfill needs for connection by seeking out
risky situations within their relationships.

Method
Participants
One hundred forty-three undergraduates currently involved in
exclusive dating relationships participated in exchange for course
credit. Twelve participants failed to follow instructions for the
recall task and/or failed to remember the nine-digit alphanumeric
string, leaving a total sample of 131 (55 men). They averaged 18.9
years in age (SD ⫽ 2.06), and they were involved in relationships
averaging 17.2 months in length (SD ⫽ 14.6).

Procedure
The experimenter told participants they would be participating
in multiple unrelated experiments on various aspects of cognitive

Table 10
Effect Sizes for Experiment 5
Dependent measure

Self-esteem sr2

Risk sr2

Self-depletion
sr2

Self-Esteem
⫻ Risk sr2

Self-Esteem ⫻
Depletion sr2

Risk ⫻
Depletion sr2

Three-way
sr2

Connectedness goals
Self-protection goals
Risking interdependence
Dependence

.01
.15
.00
.02

.03
.00
.02
.00

.03
.02
.03
.00

.05
.04
.01
.01

.01
.00
.00
.00

.00
.00
.03
.00

.00
.03
.00
.04

MURRAY, DERRICK, LEDER, AND HOLMES

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

446

Figure 3.

Willingness to risk interdependence composite in Experiment 5.

processes and interpersonal perception. All participants then completed a short background questionnaire that included demographic questions (e.g., gender, age, relationship length) and the
Rosenberg (1965) self-esteem scale. Participants randomly assigned to the general interpersonal risk condition then described a
time when a significant other hurt or disappointed them. Participants in the control condition described their commute to school.
The experimenter then introduced the cognitive busyness manipulation to participants in the busy condition. The experimenter
asked these participants to learn and then continue to rehearse a
nine-digit alphanumeric string as they completed a questionnaire
about their relationships on computer. The computer prompted
participants in the busy condition to report the string four times
throughout the administration of the dependent measures. Participants in the not-busy condition did not learn or rehearse the string.
All participants then completed the dependent measures, including
the measures of connectedness goals (␣ ⫽ .88), self-protection
goals (␣ ⫽ .86), entering interdependent situations (␣ ⫽ .91),
prioritizing interdependent activities (␣ ⫽ .63), dependence on the
partner, and mood (␣ ⫽ .88).

Results
Did diminishing executive control through the manipulation of
cognitive load usurp the corrective or control system? We conducted hierarchical regression analyses predicting each dependent
measure from (a) the centered main effects of self-esteem, an
effect-coded contrast for interpersonal risk (risk ⫽ 1, control ⫽
⫺1), and an effect-coded contrast for cognitive busyness (busy ⫽
1, not busy ⫽ ⫺1); (b) all two-way interactions; and (c) the
three-way interaction. Tables 11 (standardized betas and t values)
and 12 (effect sizes) contain the results of regression analyses. We
again focus our discussion on those measures that revealed significant effects involving the experimental conditions.

Connectedness Goals
The regression analysis predicting people’s desire to pursue
positive experiences within their dating relationship revealed a
significant main effect for cognitive busyness and a significant
Self-Esteem ⫻ Cognitive Busyness interaction. Participants

Table 11
Summary of Regression Analyses in Experiment 6
Self-esteema
Dependent measure

␤

t

Connectedness goals
Self-protection goals
Risking interdependence
Dependence
Mood

.22
⫺.40
.02
.09
.50

2.55*
⫺4.98**
⬍1
⬍1
6.44**

a

Cognitive
busynessa

Riska
␤

t

⫺.02
⬍1
.02
⬍1
.16
1.88†
⫺.15 ⫺1.69†
.01
⬍1

The error terms for the ts are based on 127 degrees of freedom.
for the ts are based on 123 degrees of freedom.
†
p ⬍ .10. * p ⬍ .05. ** p ⬍ .01.

␤

t

.25
2.88*
.13
1.61
.19
2.25*
⫺.11 ⫺1.24
.05
⬍1
b

Self-Esteem
⫻ Riskb

Self-Esteem ⫻
Busynessb

Risk ⫻
Busynessb

Three-wayc

␤

t

␤

t

␤

t

␤

t

⫺.03
.02
⫺.03
⫺.01
.02

⬍1
⬍1
⬍1
⬍1
⬍1

⫺.17
⫺.02
⫺.08
.17
⫺.06

⫺2.02*
⬍1
⬍1
1.96*
⬍1

.09
⫺.10
.17
⫺.14
.00

1.11
⬍1
1.97*
⫺1.58
⬍1

⫺.04
⫺.11
.00
.01
.00

⬍1
⫺1.38
⬍1
⬍1
⬍1

The error terms for the ts are based on 124 degrees of freedom.

c

The error terms

RISK REGULATION

447

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Table 12
Effect Sizes for Experiment 6
Dependent measure

Self-esteem sr2

Risk sr2

Cognitive
busyness sr2

Self-Esteem ⫻
Risk sr2

Self-Esteem ⫻
Busyness sr2

Risk ⫻
Busyness sr2

Three-way
sr2

Connectedness goals
Self-protection goals
Risking interdependence
Dependence
Mood

.05
.16
.00
.01
.25

.00
.00
.03
.02
.01

.06
.02
.04
.01
.01

.00
.00
.00
.00
.00

.03
.00
.00
.03
.00

.01
.01
.03
.02
.00

.00
.01
.00
.00
.00

low in self-esteem reported a stronger desire to seek out positive experiences in their relationship when they were cognitively busy (M ⫽ 7.09) than when they were not (M ⫽ 5.91),
␤ ⫽ .42, sr2 ⫽ .08, t(123) ⫽ 3.44, p ⬍ .01. This simple effect
was not significant for highs (M ⫽ 7.30 vs. M ⫽ 7.08), ␤ ⫽ .08,
sr2 ⫽ .00, t(123) ⬍ 1.

Willingness to Risk Interdependence Composite
The regression analysis predicting the willingness to risk interdependence composite (entering and prioritizing interdependent
situations, each transformed to a z score and averaged; ␣ ⫽ .72)
revealed the expected significant Interpersonal Risk ⫻ Cognitive
Busyness interaction. Figure 4 presents the predicted scores. When
executive strength was depleted through cognitive load, participants exposed to risks of trusting others reported significantly
greater willingness to seek out risky, interdependent situations in
their dating relationships than did busy control participants, ␤ ⫽
.33, sr2 ⫽ .05, t(123) ⫽ 2.70, p ⬍ .01. The simple effect of risk
was not significant in the nonbusy condition, ␤ ⫽ ⫺.01, sr2 ⫽ .00,
t(123) ⬍ 1.

Dependence on the Partner
The regression analysis predicting people’s dependence on the
partner for happiness and a sense of interpersonal connection

Figure 4.

revealed a marginal main effect for risk and a significant SelfEsteem ⫻ Cognitive Busyness interaction. Low self-esteem participants reported greater dependence when they were cognitively
busy (M ⫽ 1.76) than not (M ⫽ 2.48), ␤ ⫽ ⫺.28, sr2 ⫽ .04,
t(123) ⫽ ⫺2.27, p ⬍ .05. The effect of cognitive load was not
significant for highs (M ⫽ 2.34 vs. 2.19), ␤ ⫽ .06, sr2 ⫽ .00,
t(123) ⬍ 1. The Interpersonal Risk ⫻ Cognitive Busyness interaction fell just short of significance. Given the significant interaction on the interdependence composite, we nonetheless decomposed this interaction. Paralleling the interdependence results,
cognitively busy participants primed with risk reported significantly greater dependence on their partner (M ⫽ 1.70) than did
busy control participants (M ⫽ 2.41), ␤ ⫽ ⫺.28, sr2 ⫽ .04,
t(123) ⫽ ⫺2.27, p ⬍ .05. The effect of risk was not significant in
the nonbusy condition (M ⫽ 2.33 vs. M ⫽ 2.34), ␤ ⫽ ⫺.01, sr2 ⫽
.00, t(123) ⬍ 1.

Discussion
When executive control was usurped, participants reacted to the
general salience of interpersonal risk by seeking out risky, interdependent situations in their dating relationships. When risk regulation processes were preempted, low self-esteem people behaved
like highs—seeking out those relationship situations that had the
potential to fulfill heightened needs for connectedness. Low self-

Willingness to risk interdependence composite in Experiment 6.

MURRAY, DERRICK, LEDER, AND HOLMES

448

esteem participants also reported stronger connectedness goals and
greater dependence on their partner when they were cognitively
busy than when they were not. Though unexpected, these effects
also suggest that self-protective efforts to minimize dependence
generally require executive control. In its absence, even low selfesteem people describe their relationship as a valued context for
fulfilling connectedness needs.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Experiment 7: Risk Immediacy and Self-Protection Goals
Experiments 1 and 2 suggested that interpersonal risk automatically activates connectedness goals. The activation of such approach goals then triggers the operation of the control system and
its signature tendency to prioritize connectedness or self-protection
concerns (Experiments 3 and 4). Consequently, low self-esteem
people defend against heightened needs for connectedness by
resisting dependence. In contrast, high self-esteem people react to
increased desires for connection by seeking out situations in their
relationships likely to fulfill this goal. However, when the operation of this corrective system is compromised, even low selfesteem people act on heightened needs for connectedness and seek
out interdependent situations in the face of risk (Experiments 5 and 6).
If the risk regulation system is functional, its operation should
also be sensitive to variations in the strength of connectedness and
self-protection goals. Specifically, feelings of vulnerability that
arise directly from the partner’s actions should heighten selfprotection concerns (Paths B and D in Figure 1). As a result, even
high self-esteem people might prioritize self-protection goals in
situations where the need for caution is likely to be more pressing
than usual. Imagine that experience has taught a high self-esteem
Harry that Sally can’t be relied upon to respond sympathetically to
his work woes. In this limited domain, he might self-protect and
avoid closeness. In fact, with repeated experience, such pocketed
avoidance might become habitual and activated automatically
when the pressure to disclose in this domain arises (e.g., Neal,
Wood, & Quinn, 2006). In Experiment 7, we increased risk immediacy by having participants vividly describe a time when their
current partner hurt or disappointed them. We then measured the
implicit activation of connectedness and self-protection goals using the lexical decision task from Experiment 1. When risk was
immediate, we expected even high self-esteem people to show
heightened activation of self-protection goals when they had not
forgiven their partner’s transgression (and, thus, these limited
circumstances warranted caution).

Method
Participants
One hundred six undergraduate native English speakers currently involved in exclusive dating relationships participated in
exchange for course credit. Eight could not describe a partner
transgression, leaving a total sample of 98 (31 men). They averaged 18.9 years in age (SD ⫽ 1.3). They were involved in relationships averaging 17.7 months in length (SD ⫽ 15.0).

Procedure
The experimenter told participants that the study examined
interpersonal life experiences. All participants then completed a

short background questionnaire that included basic demographic
questions (e.g., age, gender, ethnicity, fluency in English) and the
Rosenberg (1965) self-esteem scale. Participants randomly assigned to the partner risk prime condition then provided a written
description of a time when they felt intensely disappointed, hurt, or
let down by their current partner. Participants were instructed to
describe both what happened and how they felt about the experience at the time in detail. Experimental participants then completed the lexical decision task from Experiment 1. They then
completed a final questionnaire that contained the measure of
mood (␣ ⫽ .89) and questions about their appraisal of the transgression among fillers. Participants in the control condition completed the lexical decision task and questionnaire before they
provided a brief description of a time when their partner hurt or
disappointed them. (This allowed us to eliminate participants who
could not think of an incident from both conditions.)

Measures
Transgression appraisal. Two items tapped people’s current
appraisal of the transgression (i.e., “Have you forgiven your partner for this event?” [1 ⫽ absolutely no, 7 ⫽ absolutely yes]; “How
hurt do you feel when you think about this event now?” [1 ⫽ not
at all hurt, 7 ⫽ extremely hurt]). Responses for each item were
reverse-scored such that higher scores reflected a more positive
appraisal of the transgression.

Coding
An undergraduate coder read each story and coded whether or
not the narrative concluded happily (e.g., forgiveness, positive
outcome of the transgression). A subset of the narratives was
coded twice (percentage agreement ⫽ 84.5), providing a reliability
check.

Results
Did thinking of a hurtful transgression activate self-protection
goals for even high self-esteem people? We first created a measure
that indexed people’s tendency to put a positive, forgiving spin on
the transgression by averaging responses to the two appraisal items
and the coder’s happy-ending rating (each score was first transformed to a z score; ␣ ⫽ .55). We then conducted a series of
three-step hierarchical regressions predicting reaction times to
connectedness, self-protection, and hostility-related words. In the
first step, we entered centered responses to nonwords and samevalence noninterpersonal words (i.e., fruit words for connectedness, insect words for self-protection and hostility-related words)
to control for individual differences in reaction time and responses
to affectively similar words, respectively. Next, we entered a
dummy-coded contrast for experiment condition (1 ⫽ partner risk,
0 ⫽ control) and the centered main effects of self-esteem and
transgression appraisal. We entered all possible two-way interactions on the third step and the three-way interaction on the final
step. Table 13 contains the predicted scores for participants relatively low and high in self-esteem in each condition. Tables 14
(standardized betas and t values) and 15 (effect sizes) contain the
results of regression analyses. We discuss only the significant
effects involving experimental condition.

RISK REGULATION

449

Table 13
Predicted Scores for Low and High Self-Esteem Participants in Each Condition in Experiment 7

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Low self-esteem

High self-esteem

Dependent measure

Transgression
forgiven

No
transgression
forgiven

Transgression
not forgiven

No
transgression
not forgiven

Transgression
forgiven

No
transgression
forgiven

Transgression
not forgiven

No
transgression
not forgiven

Self-protection words
Connectedness words
Hostility words
Mood

759.31
812.73
816.42
5.98

851.49
772.46
851.15
5.99

840.17
751.37
757.33
5.21

786.69
761.31
813.06
5.08

838.01
802.56
792.62
6.43

715.87
811.53
826.00
6.59

727.85
814.04
757.43
5.73

838.03
733.21
843.06
5.37

Self-Protection Words
The regression analysis predicting reaction times to selfprotection words revealed a significant Self-Esteem ⫻ Transgression Appraisal ⫻ Condition interaction. The two-way Transgression Appraisal ⫻ Condition interaction was significant for high
self-esteem participants, ␤ ⫽ .26, sr2 ⫽ .02, t(88) ⫽ 2.18, p ⬍ .05,
but fell shy of marginal significance for low self-esteem participants, ␤ ⫽ ⫺.18, sr2 ⫽ .01, t(88) ⫽ ⫺1.52, p ⫽ .13. We then
decomposed the two-way interactions into the simple effects of
experimental condition for forgiven and not-forgiven transgressions.
When recalling a transgression they had forgiven, high selfesteem participants were slower to identify self-protection words
in the partner risk than in the control condition, ␤ ⫽.18, sr2 ⫽ .01,
t(88) ⫽ 1.62, p ⫽ .11. However, they were quicker to identify
self-protection words in the partner risk than in the control condition when recalling a transgression they had not forgiven, ␤ ⫽
⫺.21, sr2 ⫽ .01, t(88) ⫽ ⫺1.50, p ⫽ .14. In this sense, high
self-esteem people were appropriately self-protective, exhibiting
the greatest activation of self-protection goals when circumstance
warranted it. However, when recalling a forgiven transgression,
low self-esteem people were quicker to identify self-protection
words in the partner risk than in the control condition, ␤ ⫽ ⫺.20,
sr2 ⫽ .01, t(88) ⫽ ⫺1.54, p ⫽ .13. Thus, the prospect of approaching the partner activated self-protection goals, providing an im-

plicit replication of the effects observed in Experiments 3 and 4.
The simple effect of condition was not significant when lows had
not forgiven their partner, ␤ ⫽ .07, sr2 ⫽ .00, t(88) ⬍ 1.

Connectedness Words
The regression analysis predicting reaction times to connectedness words also revealed a significant Self-Esteem ⫻ Transgression Appraisal ⫻ Condition interaction. The two-way Transgression Appraisal ⫻ Condition interaction was significant for high
self-esteem participants, ␤ ⫽ ⫺.19, sr2 ⫽ .01, t(88) ⫽ ⫺2.09, p ⬍
.05, but not for low self-esteem participants, ␤ ⫽ .06, sr2 ⫽ .00,
t(88) ⬍ 1. When recalling a transgression they had not forgiven,
high self-esteem participants were slower to identify connectedness words in the partner risk than in the control condition, ␤ ⫽
.23, sr2 ⫽ .01, t(88) ⫽ 2.03, p ⬍ .05. The opposite, but not
significant, effect emerged when highs had forgiven the transgression, ␤ ⫽ ⫺.07, sr2 ⫽ .00, t(88) ⬍ 1. Neither simple effect of
experimental condition was significant for participants relatively
low in self-esteem (ts ⬍ 1).

Hostility Words
The regression analysis predicting response times to hostilityrelated words revealed a predictable significant main effect of
condition. Attesting to the severity of the threat raised, participants

Table 14
Summary of Regression Analyses in Experiment 7
Self-esteema
Dependent measure
d

Self-protection
Connectednesse
Hostilityf
Mood

Partner
transgressiona

Forgivenessa

Self-Esteem ⫻
Transgressionb

Self-Esteem ⫻
Forgivenessb

Transgression ⫻
Forgivenessb

Three-wayc

␤

t

␤

t

␤

t

␤

t

␤

t

␤

t

␤

t

⫺.06
.07
⫺.02
.24

⬍1
1.45
⬍1
2.68**

⫺.02
.00
⫺.18
.03

⬍1
⬍1
⫺2.78*
⬍1

.02
.09
.11
.46

⬍1
1.69†
1.62
5.12**

.06
.07
⫺.03
.01

⬍1
⬍1
⬍1
⬍1

⫺.06
.00
⫺.08
.04

⬍1
⬍1
⫺1.19
⬍1

.04
⫺.07
.09
⫺.11

⬍1
⬍1
⬍1
⬍1

.24
⫺.14
.04
⫺.07

2.73**
⫺2.01*
⬍1
⬍1

a
The error terms for the ts are based on 92 degrees of freedom for the reaction time measures and 93 degrees of freedom for the mood measure. b The
error terms for the ts are based on 89 degrees of freedom for the reaction time measures and 90 degrees of freedom for the mood measure. c The error
terms for the ts are based on 88 degrees of freedom for the reaction time measures and 89 degrees of freedom for the mood measure. d The covariates,
entered on Step 1, predicted reaction times to self-protection words for nonwords, ␤ ⫽ .49, sr2 ⫽ .09, t(95) ⫽ 4.64, p ⬍ .01, and for negative control words,
␤ ⫽ .35, sr2 ⫽ .04, t(95) ⫽ 3.32, p ⬍ .01. e The covariates, entered on Step 1, predicted reaction times to connectedness words for nonwords, ␤ ⫽ .49,
sr2 ⫽ .12, t(95) ⫽ 6.98, p ⬍ .01, and for negative control words, ␤ ⫽ .46, sr2 ⫽ .11, t(95) ⫽ 6.6, p ⬍ .01. f The covariates, entered on Step 1, predicted
reaction times to hostility words for nonwords, ␤ ⫽ .34, sr2 ⫽ .04, t(95) ⫽ 3.08, p ⬍ .01, and for negative control words, ␤ ⫽ .46, sr2 ⫽ .08, t(95) ⫽
4.21, p ⬍ .01.
†
p ⬍ .10. * p ⬍ .05. ** p ⬍ .01.

MURRAY, DERRICK, LEDER, AND HOLMES

450

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Table 15
Effect Sizes in Experiment 7

Dependent measure

Self-esteem
sr2

Partner
transgression
sr2

Forgiveness
sr2

Self-Esteem ⫻
Transgression
sr2

Self-Esteem ⫻
Forgiveness
sr2

Transgression ⫻
Forgiveness sr2

Three-way
sr2

Self-protection
Connectedness
Hostility
Mood

.00
.01
.00
.05

.00
.00
.03
.00

.00
.01
.01
.20

.00
.00
.00
.00

.00
.00
.01
.00

.00
.00
.00
.01

.03
.01
.00
.00

in the experimental condition were quicker to identify hostilityrelated words (M ⫽ 780.16) than were participants in the control
condition (M ⫽ 832.53).

Discussion
When circumstance warrants, even people with high self-esteem
evidence self-protectively calibrated risk regulation processes.
When high self-esteem people had not forgiven their partner’s
transgression, reminders of this hurt increased the cognitive accessibility of self-protection words and decreased the accessibility of
connectedness words. They were both quicker to identify selfprotection words and slower to identify connectedness words in
the partner risk than in the control condition, suggesting differential goal activation. However, being reminded of this hurt actually
seemed to suppress self-protection goals when high self-esteem
people had forgiven the transgression. They were slower to identify self-protection words in the partner risk than in the control
condition. The responses of high self-esteem people thus reveal
implicit associations to risk that mirror more deliberative considerations. Unforgiven transgressions compelled more caution and
less connectedness seeking. In contrast, it was forgiving the transgression (and the specter of being closer to the partner) that
heightened self-protection for low self-esteem people. When lows
had forgiven the transgression, they were actually quicker to
identify self-protection words in the partner risk than in the control
condition. The responses of low self-esteem people thus reveal
implicit associations to risk that belie their more deliberative
judgments. For lows, forgiving the transgression seemed to make
the prospect of rejection of greater concern, prompting greater
defensiveness even in goals that were activated automatically.

Experiment 8: Connectedness Goals Amplify SelfProtection Concerns
If the risk regulation system is functional, its operation should
also be sensitive to the magnitude of the conflict between connectedness and self-protection goals. Stronger desires to approach the
partner should increase concerns about rejection (because rejection
hurts more in the context of greater need). Activating approach
goals should intensify the pressure to self-protect and reduce risk
(Epstein, 1982). This should be especially true for people prone to
self-protect, such as those low in self-esteem. They should become
all the more resistant to dependence in situations where the desire
to approach makes a partner’s rejection of greater concern. In
Experiment 8, we manipulated both the strength of approach goals
and the severity of the dating partner’s criticism. We then measured the willingness to increase interdependence by seeking and

providing support within the relationship. We hoped to further
replicate the opposite and ironic effect that approach goals have on
the behavior of lows. That is, we expected a partner’s criticisms to
sting all the more when approach goals were activated, motivating
low self-esteem people to distance themselves from support situations.

Method
Participants
Ninety-one couples currently involved in exclusive dating relationships participated in exchange for course credit or tickets for a
lottery drawing. The target participants averaged 19.4 years in age
(SD ⫽ 1.7), and their relationships averaged 15.4 months in length
(SD ⫽ 15.6).

Procedure
On arriving at the laboratory, participants learned that the study
examined various aspects of their experiences in their dating
relationships. Each member of the couple was then seated individually at one of two laboratory tables, arranged so that participants
had their backs to their partners. The experimenter then told
participants that both members of the couple would be completing
identical sets of questionnaires and that they would proceed from
one questionnaire to the next when both members of the couple
had finished. The experimenter also reminded participants not to
speak to one another as the study progressed. Participants then
completed a questionnaire that contained demographic questions
and the Rosenberg (1965) self-esteem scale.
Next, target participants in the partner criticism experimental
condition were led to believe that their partner was spending an
excessive amount of time listing qualities in the target that their
partner disliked (Murray et al., 2002, Experiment 3). To achieve
this end, the target participants received a one-page questionnaire
that asked them to list important aspects of their partner’s character
that they disliked. The instructions also stated that participants
should not list any more than one such quality if that was all that
easily came to mind. Target participants were led to believe that
their partners received the identical questionnaire. However, the
partners actually received a one-page questionnaire asking them to
list as many of the items in their residence as they could. Through
this subterfuge, target participants spent a few (anxious) minutes
waiting for their partners to finish this task. (The experimenter
stopped the partner 5 min after the target participant finished if the
partner had not yet finished). In the control condition, targets and
partner participants both received the one-page questionnaire that

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

RISK REGULATION

asked them to list important aspects of their partner’s character that
they disliked. As a result, control target participants finished the
task at the same time as their partners (and had no reason to believe
their partners perceived an inordinate number of faults).
The experimenter then introduced the implicit approach–
avoidance prime utilized in Experiment 4 under the guise of
needing pilot data for a cognitive psychology study. Participants in
the approach goals condition sorted words that fell into the categories of approaching a desired state, cooking, and child care.
Participants in the avoidance goals condition sorted words that fell
into the categories of avoiding a feared state, cooking, and child
care.
All participants then completed a questionnaire that contained
the dependent measures among filler items. Participants completed
measures tapping connectedness goals (␣ ⫽ .88), self-protection
goals (␣ ⫽ .86), perceptions of the partner’s disregard, willingness
to provide support to the partner, willingness to seek support from
the partner, and state self-esteem.
At this point in the experiment, the experimenter then asked
participants to help with a further study. Under this subterfuge,
we obtained an objective measure of people’s willingness to
provide support to the partner. The experimenter explained that
one member of the couple would be asked to give a speech
about the challenges facing undergraduates that would be videotaped for the office of the dean. The experimenter then asked
the partner to pick a slip of paper from a cup to see who would
give the speech. This slip always identified the partner. The
experimenter then took the partner to another room, informed
him or her that he or she would not be giving a speech, and
asked the partner to write a note to the participant stating, “I’m
really nervous. Do you think I can do this?” The experimenter
then took the note back to the target participant and asked the
target if he or she wanted to write a note in response (87.9% of
participants wrote a return note). Participants then completed
the manipulation check. The experimenter then probed for
suspicion and conducted a process debriefing.

Measures
Perceptions of partner’s disregard. This 12-item scale (␣ ⫽
.91), adapted from Goldsmith, McDermott, and Alexander (2000),
asked participants to describe their partner’s perception of them on
7-point bipolar trait scales (e.g., helpful . . . hurtful, selfish . . .
generous, encouraging . . . discouraging, considerate . . . inconsiderate). Responses were scored such that higher overall scores
reflected more negative perceived partner evaluations, reflecting
greater hurt and internalization of the partner’s criticism.
Willingness to provide support. This 15-item scale (␣ ⫽ .96),
adapted from Zimet, Dehlem, Zimet, and Farley (1988), tapped
people’s future intention to provide their partner with emotional
support and assistance (e.g., “help my partner when he/she is in
need,” “be a real source of comfort to my partner,” “be someone
my partner can count on when things go wrong,” “help my partner
make decisions,” “help my partner carry out a difficult assignment”). Participants responded on 9-point scales (1 ⫽ not at all
true, 9 ⫽ completely true). Higher scores reflected greater support
provision.
Willingness to seek support. This five-item scale (␣ ⫽ .90)
assessed how much participants relied on their partners for socio-

451

emotional support (e.g., “To what extent can you turn to your
partner for advice about problems?”; “To what extent can you
count on your partner to distract you from worries when you feel
under stress?”). Participants responded on 7-point scales (1 ⫽ not
at all/never, 7 ⫽ very much/always). Higher scores reflected
greater willingness to seek support.
State self-esteem. This 21-item bipolar scale (␣ ⫽ .94) tapped
people’s current feelings about themselves (1 ⫽ good, 7 ⫽ bad
(reverse-scored), accepted . . . rejected (reverse-scored), ashamed
. . . proud, worthless . . . valuable). Higher scores indicated higher
state self-esteem.
Manipulation check. This question asked target experimental
and control participants to indicate how many faults they believed
their partner had listed.

Coding of Support Note
Two undergraduate coders coded the support note on three
focal dimensions (i.e., “Did the participant state the partner was
overreacting?” [1 ⫽ no, 0 ⫽ yes]; “Did the participant offer the
partner encouragement?” [1 ⫽ yes, 0 ⫽ no]; “How supportive
do you think the note is?” [1 ⫽ not at all, 5 ⫽ very]). Percentage agreement in coding the categorical dimensions was 68.3%
and 84.1%, and interrater reliability for the overall support
ratings was .72. We first averaged the coder ratings and then
transformed these ratings to a z score before creating the support index (␣ ⫽ .51).

Results
Did priming approach goals heighten the pain of the partner’s
criticism, motivating low self-esteem people in particular to actively distance themselves from caregiving situations that highlight
the need to be interdependent? To examine this question, we
conducted a series of hierarchical regression analyses predicting
each dependent measure from (a) the centered main effects of
self-esteem, an effect-coded contrast for the partner criticism condition (rejection ⫽ 1, control ⫽ ⫺1), and an effect-coded contrast
for the approach goals prime (approach ⫽ 1, avoidance ⫽ ⫺1); (b)
all possible two-way interaction terms; and (c) the three-way
interaction. Table 16 contains the predicted scores for participants
relatively low and high in self-esteem in each condition. Tables 17
(standardized betas and t values) and 18 (effect sizes) contain the
results of regression analyses. We discuss only those measures that
revealed significant effects involving the experimental conditions
for the sake of brevity.

Manipulation Check
The regression analysis on the manipulation check revealed a
marginal main effect for the partner criticism condition, ␤ ⫽ .20,
sr2 ⫽ .04, t(78) ⫽ 1.89, p ⬍ .06, and a marginally significant
Self-Esteem ⫻ Partner Criticism interaction, ␤ ⫽ ⫺.20, sr2 ⫽ .04,
t(75) ⫽ ⫺1.87, p ⬍ .07. Low self-esteem participants in the
partner criticism condition believed their partner listed considerably more faults (M ⫽ 13.6) than did controls (M ⫽ 3.59), ␤ ⫽ .42,
sr2 ⫽ .08, t(83) ⫽ 2.66, p ⬍ .05. This simple effect was not

MURRAY, DERRICK, LEDER, AND HOLMES

452

Table 16
Predicted Scores for Low and High Self-Esteem Participants in Each Condition in Experiment 8

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Low self-esteem

High self-esteem

Dependent measure

Criticism
approach

No criticism
approach

Criticism
avoidance

No criticism
avoidance

Criticism
approach

No criticism
approach

Criticism
avoidance

No criticism
avoidance

Connectedness goals
Self-protection goals
Perceptions of partner’s disregard
Seeking support interdependence
Support in note
State self-esteem

4.67
3.86
3.21
⫺.71
.30
4.53

6.29
4.14
2.10
.23
⫺.19
4.66

5.52
3.40
2.75
⫺.30
⫺.21
4.95

5.13
4.31
2.86
⫺.63
.00
5.24

6.14
2.79
1.29
.68
.00
6.25

6.06
2.65
1.81
.27
.12
6.30

6.15
2.52
1.87
.46
⫺.04
6.00

5.34
2.25
2.07
.27
⫺.17
5.94

significant for highs (M ⫽ 3.55 vs. M ⫽ 3.44), ␤ ⫽ .02, sr2 ⫽ .00,
t(83) ⬍ 1.15

Connectedness Goals
The regression analysis predicting people’s desire to pursue and
focus on the positive aspects of their relationship revealed a
significant Partner Criticism ⫻ Approach Goals interaction. As
expected, the goal of approaching a desired state actually suppressed the expression of connectedness goals in response to a
painful and immediate experience with risk. Participants primed
with approach goals reported less desire to nurture their relationship’s strengths when they thought their partner perceived an
inordinate number of faults in them (M ⫽ 5.40) relative to control
participants (M ⫽ 6.18), ␤ ⫽ ⫺.29, sr2 ⫽ .04, t(83) ⫽ ⫺1.92, p ⫽
.06. When primed with the goal of avoiding a feared state, participants reported somewhat stronger connectedness goals in the
experimental (M ⫽ 5.83) than in the control condition (M ⫽ 5.24),
although this simple effect was not significant, ␤ ⫽ .19, sr2 ⫽ .02,
t(83) ⫽ 1.42, p ⫽ .16.

Perceptions of the Partner’s Disregard
The regression analysis predicting the extent to which participants internalized their partner’s perceived criticism revealed the
expected significant Self-Esteem ⫻ Partner Criticism ⫻ Approach
Goals interaction. The two-way Partner Criticism ⫻ Approach
Goals interaction was significant for low self-esteem, ␤ ⫽ .32,
sr2 ⫽ .05, t(83) ⫽ 2.52, p ⬍ .05, but not high self-esteem, ␤ ⫽
⫺.09, sr2 ⫽ .00, t(83) ⬍ 1, participants. Priming approach intensified the hurt and pain of partner rejection for low self-esteem
people. When primed with approach goals, lows in the partner
criticism condition believed their partner regarded them significantly more negatively than did controls, ␤ ⫽ .59, sr2 ⫽ .07,
t(83) ⫽ 3.05, p ⬍ .01. The simple effect of partner criticism was
not significant for lows primed with avoidance goals, ␤ ⫽ ⫺.11,
sr2 ⫽ .00, t(83) ⬍ 1. When primed with approach goals, high
self-esteem people in the partner criticism condition reported feeling more positively regarded, although this effect was not significant, ␤ ⫽ ⫺.27, sr2 ⫽ .04, t(83) ⫽ ⫺1.54, p ⫽ .13.

Seeking Support–Interdependence Composite
We created a composite measure of the willingness to seek
interdependence by averaging responses to the willingness to

provide support and willingness to seek support scales (each
transformed to a z score; ␣ ⫽ .77). The predicted scores in Table
16 illustrate the expected Self-Esteem ⫻ Partner Criticism ⫻
Approach Goals interaction. The two-way Partner Criticism ⫻
Approach Goals interaction was significant for low self-esteem,
␤ ⫽ ⫺.35, sr2 ⫽ .06, t(83) ⫽ ⫺2.51, p ⬍ .05, but not high
self-esteem, ␤ ⫽ .06, sr2 ⫽ .00, t(83) ⬍ 1, participants. When
primed with approach goals, low self-esteem participants in the
partner criticism condition reported seeking significantly less interdependence in the social support domain than did controls, ␤ ⫽
⫺.53, sr2 ⫽ .05, t(83) ⫽ ⫺2.49, p ⬍ .05. No other simple effect
of partner criticism approached significance, t(83)s ⬍ 1.5.

Actual Support Provided in Note
The regression analysis predicting the supportiveness of the note
revealed a marginally significant Self-Esteem ⫻ Partner Criticism ⫻ Approach Goals interaction. The two-way Partner Criticism ⫻ Approach Goals interaction was significant for low selfesteem, ␤ ⫽ .41, sr2 ⫽ .08, t(73) ⫽ 2.58, p ⬍ .05, but not high
self-esteem, ␤ ⫽ .05, sr2 ⫽ .00, t(73) ⬍ 1, participants. When
primed with approach goals, low self-esteem people in the partner
criticism condition actually provided objectively more support to
their partner than did controls, ␤ ⫽ .65, sr2 ⫽ .09, t(73) ⫽ 2.79,
p ⬍ .01. Thus, despite increased intentions to minimize interdependence, the goal of seeking closeness evidenced itself in response to the partner’s expression of need. As we later detail, we
suspect this effect emerged precisely because the partner’s expression of vulnerability in asking for support signaled the safety of
seeking connection. No other simple effect of partner criticism
approached significance, t(73)s ⬍ 1. (We included the number of
words in the note as a control variable in this analysis.)

State Self-Esteem
The regression analysis predicting state self-esteem revealed a
significant Self-Esteem ⫻ Approach Goals interaction that illus15
Prior research using this exact manipulation of partner criticism
revealed only a main effect for condition, such that low and high selfesteem people both believed their partner listed more negative qualities
(Murray et al., 2002, Experiment 3). The weaker effects on the manipulation in this experiment may reflect the events (i.e., the partner’s expression
of need) that intervened between the manipulation and the administration
of the manipulation check.

RISK REGULATION

453

Table 17
Summary of Regression Analyses in Experiment 8
Self-esteema

Partner
criticisma

Approach
goala

Self-Esteem ⫻
Criticismb

Dependent measure

␤

t

␤

t

␤

t

␤

t

Connectedness goals
Self-protection goals
Perceptions of partner’s disregard
Seeking support interdependence
Support in note
State self-esteem

.21
⫺.48
⫺.51
.44
⫺.01
.72

1.93†
⫺4.96**
⫺5.55**
4.42**
⬍1
9.59**

⫺.01
⫺.07
.02
.02
.07
⫺.07

⬍1
⬍1
⬍1
⬍1
⬍1
⬍1

.06
.10
⫺.11
.05
.17
⫺.05

⬍1
1.05
⫺1.12
⬍1
1.53
⬍1

.18
.15
⫺.20
.15
⫺.17
.06

1.75†
1.56
⫺2.25*
1.49
⫺1.56
⬍1

Self-Esteem
⫻ Approachb
␤

t

.05
⬍1
.03
⬍1
⫺.10 ⫺1.07
⫺.01
⬍1
.08
⬍1
.22 3.06**

Criticism ⫻
Approachb

Three-wayc

␤

t

␤

t

⫺.25
.04
.11
⫺.14
.24
.01

⫺2.40*
⬍1
1.24
⫺1.42
2.21*
⬍1

.12
⫺.07
⫺.20
.21
⫺.19
⫺.04

1.13
⬍1
⫺2.26*
2.09*
⫺1.75†
⬍1

The error terms for the ts are based on 87 degrees of freedom for all the measures except support in note (df ⫽ 77). b The error terms for the ts are based
on 84 degrees of freedom for all the measures except support in note (df ⫽ 74). c The error terms for the ts are based on 83 degrees of freedom for all
the measures except support in note (df ⫽ 73).
†
p ⬍ .10. * p ⬍ .05. ** p ⬍ .01.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

a

the prospect of rejection more aversive for lows, prompting greater
defensiveness on the measures of behavioral intention. Specifically,
when primed with approach, low self-esteem people internalized their
partner’s criticism, worrying that their partner saw them as generally
undesirable. They protected against such feelings of vulnerability by
reducing their future willingness to seek and provide support, a
component of interdependence critical for maintaining satisfying relationships (Collins & Feeney, 2000). However, the behavior of these
low self-esteem people shifted once the partner sought support and,
thus, the prospect of connection guaranteed no risk of rejection (as our
model would predict). Specifically, when approach goals were activated, low self-esteem people in the partner criticism condition actually provided objectively more supportive notes than did control
participants. Thus, the partner’s expression of vulnerability in soliciting support seemed to obviate concerns about rejection, allowing
low self-esteem people to act on the basis of heightened needs for
connection.

trated the benefits of regulatory fit (Higgins, 2000). High selfesteem participants reported feeling better about themselves when
primed with approach (M ⫽ 6.27) than with avoidance goals (M ⫽
5.97), ␤ ⫽ .17, sr2 ⫽ .01, t(83) ⫽ 1.69, p ⬍ .10. In contrast, low
self-esteem participants reported feeling significantly better about
themselves when primed with avoidance (M ⫽ 5.09) than with
approach goals (M ⫽ 4.59), ␤ ⫽ ⫺.29, sr2 ⫽ .04, t(83) ⫽ ⫺2.70,
p ⬍ .01. This latter effect raises the possibility that the distancing
effects observed for lows might be an artifact of depressed selfesteem. However, when we controlled for state self-esteem, the
three-way interactions predicting perceptions of the partner’s regard, ␤ ⫽ ⫺.22, sr2 ⫽ .05, t(83) ⫽ ⫺2.83, p ⬍ .01; the willingness
to seek support-interdependence, ␤ ⫽ .22, sr2 ⫽ .05, t(83) ⫽ 2.35,
p ⬍ .05; and the actual support provided, ␤ ⫽ ⫺.18, sr2 ⫽ .03,
t(83) ⫽ ⫺1.66, p ⫽ .10, all remained significant or marginally
significant.

Discussion
General Discussion

Stronger desires to approach the partner seemed to increase
concerns about rejection, thereby intensifying the pressure to increase distance (Epstein, 1982). When primed with the goal of
approaching a desired state, people who had recently been hurt by
their partner actually reported less desire to nurture their relationship on the measure of connectedness goals.
Such paradoxical effects of approach goals were particularly evident among low self-esteem people. For lows, the stronger the goal to
approach the partner, the more motivating the goal of avoiding rejection seemed to become. In particular, getting closer seemed to make

A great irony of interpersonal life is this: The romantic relationships that have the most potential to satisfy adult needs for interpersonal connection are the very relationships that necessitate
risking the most (Baumeister, Wotman, & Stillwell, 1993). Given
the vulnerability inherent in narrowing one’s social connections to
focus on one partner, some level of circumspection is required and
appropriate. However, to be happy over the longer term, people
need to set rejection concerns aside and risk substantial dependence (Murray et al., 2006). Unfortunately, people low in self-

Table 18
Effect Sizes in Experiment 8
Dependent measure

Self-esteem
sr2

Partner
criticism sr2

Approach
goal sr2

Self-Esteem ⫻
Criticism sr2

Self-Esteem ⫻
Approach sr2

Criticism ⫻
Approach sr2

Three-way
sr2

Connectedness goals
Self-protection goals
Perceptions of partner’s disregard
Seeking support interdependence
Support in note
State self-esteem

.04
.22
.25
.18
.00
.49

.00
.01
.00
.00
.01
.00

.00
.01
.01
.00
.03
.00

.03
.02
.04
.02
.03
.00

.00
.00
.01
.00
.01
.05

.06
.00
.01
.02
.06
.00

.01
.01
.04
.04
.03
.00

454

MURRAY, DERRICK, LEDER, AND HOLMES

esteem—the very people most in need of social connection—are
the least likely to take the kinds of interdependence risks that forge
satisfying relationships.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Balancing Connectedness and Self-Protection Goals
The correlational study captured the conflicted motivations of
people low in self-esteem. For lows, greater relationship longevity
predicted heightened desires to focus on the positive,
connectedness-promoting aspects of the relationship. However,
this greater objective reason to trust in the partner did not abate
their concerns about vulnerability and loss. Instead, they tended to
express stronger self-protection concerns in longer relationships.
In contrast, high self-esteem people were appropriately judicious,
more desirous of connection and less concerned about selfprotection when they had greater reason to trust in the relationship’s stability.
The risk regulation system depicted in Figure 1 sheds light on
exactly how and why such differential dynamics emerge. This
model assumes that the strongest, initial, and automatic response to
the salience of external interpersonal risk is to seek connection to
the partner (Path A in Figure 1). This reflects the functionalist
argument that the most effective means of dealing with an unpredictable world is to forge the types of interpersonal connections
that will ensure one’s needs are met (Kelley, 1979; Leary &
Baumeister, 2000; Mikulincer & Shaver, 2003; Tooby & Cosmides, 1996). Consistent with this logic, participants reminded of
the risks of depending on significant others were quicker to identify connectedness words in a lexical decision task (Experiment 1),
suggesting that risk automatically activates the goal of seeking
connection. Such heightened needs for connection also surfaced in
people’s self-reported goals. Participants primed with the risks of
depending on others reported stronger desires to nurture the positive aspects of their relationships (Experiments 2 and 5). They
also tended to report stronger desires to pursue positive life outcomes (Experiment 2). However, when an event internal to the
relationship made rejection salient, self-protection goals evidenced
readier activation (Paths B and D). The partner’s criticism suppressed connectedness goals for both low and high self-esteem
people when they were primed with the general goal of approaching a desired state (Experiment 8). For people high in self-esteem,
thinking of a partner transgression they had not forgiven also
suppressed the activation of connectedness goals and heightened
the activation of self-protection goals on the lexical decision task
(Experiment 7).
Once activated, self-protection goals then trigger an executive
control system. This system optimizes assurance by directing
people toward situations that offer a safe level of dependence. This
intervening step between goal activation and execution reflects the
reality that needs for connection are not likely to be met in all
situations (Paths C and E in Figure 1). The control system exists to
resolve any conflict between connectedness and self-protection
goals and to provide a clear direction for behavior (Cacioppo et al.,
1999)—a directive that prioritizes self-protection for people low in
self-esteem and connectedness for people high in self-esteem.
The conflict low self-esteem people experience between connectedness and self-protection goals evidenced itself in ambivalent
associations to risk. Although low self-esteem people reacted to
risk by aspiring to focus on the positive, connectedness-promoting

aspects of their relationships, they did not take the actual steps
necessary to increase interdependence (Experiment 2). Instead,
directly priming the general goal of approaching a desired state
triggered risk regulation processes that served self-protection
goals. When primed with approach goals, low self-esteem people
reported feeling less close to their dating partner (Experiments 3
and 4)—suggesting that the mere prospect of getting closer (evidenced in more positive implicit associations to the partner) activated the goal of keeping a safer distance (Experiment 4). They
were also quicker to identify self-protection words in a lexical
decision task when reminded of a partner transgression they had
already forgiven (Experiment 7). Such data further suggest that the
goal of getting closer (captured by the inclination to forgive)
makes the goal of avoiding rejection all the more motivating. In
fact, a partner’s criticism actually hurt low self-esteem people
more when they were primed with approach than with avoidance
goals. They then seemed to defend against this hurt by reporting
less willingness to seek and provide support in their relationships
(Experiment 8). However, a slight shift in circumstance prompted
the expression of connectedness goals. When hurt but motivated to
approach, lows wrote objectively more supportive notes in response to their partner’s clear and direct expression of need and
receptiveness to connection. Thus, low self-esteem people seem
perfectly willing to seek connection in situations that guarantee no
risk of rejection (as our model would predict). In fact, low selfesteem people effectively minimize the chance of rejection by
engaging in safe instrumental behaviors, such as finding a partner’s lost keys, that increase a partner’s dependence on them
without increasing the risk of rejection (Murray et al., 2007).
Rather than experiencing an acute conflict between connectedness and self-protection goals, high self-esteem people acted on
the basis of heightened needs for connection in most circumstances—seeking out the interdependent situations capable of
fulfilling these goals. They responded to the general salience of
interpersonal risk by reporting greater willingness to enter interdependent situations within their relationships (Experiment 2).
When we directly primed the general goal of approaching a desired
state, high self-esteem people reported feeling closer to their
partners on both implicit and explicit measures (Experiment 4).
When reminded of a partner transgression they had forgiven, they
were also slower to respond to self-protection words in a lexical
decision task (Experiment 7), suggesting that overriding selfprotection goals can become an automatic aspect of risk regulation
for people high in self-esteem.
Do the divergent responses of low and high self-esteem people
indicate the operation of a secondary, corrective control system? If
risk regulation requires executive control, taxing executive
strength should usurp correction, but it should not affect the
activation of connectedness goals (Gilbert, 1989). Therefore, taxing executive strength should increase the likelihood that both low
self-esteem (and high self-esteem) people will seek to fulfill connectedness goals. Consistent with this logic, merely making low
self-esteem people cognitively busy increased the strength of connectedness goals (Experiment 6). When self-regulatory capacities
were depleted, low self-esteem participants also responded to the
general salience of risk by reporting diminished self-protection
concerns and heightened dependence on their current dating partner (Experiment 5). Most critical, when executive strength was
taxed, low and high self-esteem people both responded to the

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

RISK REGULATION

reminder of the risks of depending on others by seeking out risky
but connectedness-promoting situations of interdependence within
their dating relationships.
Limitations of the current data deserve mention. First, risk had
a statistically significant main effect on the measure of connectedness goals only in Experiment 2. To examine the strength of the
risk-connectedness main effect on this measure, we meta-analyzed
the main effects of risk condition on connectedness goals across
Experiments 2, 5, 6, and 8. Winer’s (1971) combined test revealed
that the meta-analytic effect of risk was strong and significant (d ⫽
.30, z ⫽ 2.75, p ⬍ .01). Second, the predicted Risk ⫻ Executive
Strength interaction predicting the willingness to risk interdependence composite was significant in Experiment 6 but only marginally significant in Experiment 5. A meta-analysis of this effect
across Experiments 5 and 6 revealed a significant Executive
Strength ⫻ Risk interaction (d ⫽ .35, z ⫽ 2.58, p ⬍ .05). This
further suggests that risk automatically activates connectedness
goals (because people seek greater interdependence in response to
risk when executive strength is impaired).
Third, the measure of self-protection goals revealed significant
interactive effects involving condition only in Experiment 5. Low
self-esteem people primed with risk actually reported less concern
about rejection when self-regulatory strength was depleted. Such
insight was not apparent in the other experiments—something that
is perhaps unsurprising given people’s limited access to the contents of their consciousness (Wilson, 2002). In the experiments
involving general (i.e., external) manipulations of risk, the evidence for the activation of self-protection goals remained largely
indirect. We inferred the operation of these goals from the absence
of behavioral intentions to risk interdependence in Experiment 2
and the effects of depleting executive strength on the intention to
risk interdependence in Experiments 5 and 6. However, when the
romantic partner’s actions made risk salient, we found stronger
direct evidence of the activation of self-protection goals: Unforgiving highs and forgiving lows were quicker to identify selfprotection words when reminded of their partner’s transgression in
Experiment 7. Low self-esteem people primed with approach goals
also reported markedly decreased intentions to provide unsolicited
support to a rejecting partner in Experiment 8.
Of course, we cannot argue that self-esteem actually caused any
of the effects we attribute to it. Fortunately, we do not wish to
make this argument. Rather, we assume that self-esteem has its
moderating effects because it functions as a powerful dispositional
proxy for expectations of the partner’s acceptance and responsiveness (Murray et al., 2006). If that is the case, other dispositions that
capture general expectations of partner responsiveness, such as
attachment anxiety (Mikulincer & Shaver, 2003), rejection sensitivity (Downey & Feldman, 1996), or self-esteem that is contingent on interpersonal acceptance (Crocker & Wolfe, 2001), should
have comparable effects on risk regulation. Direct measures of felt
acceptance, such as trust in a partner’s responsiveness (Holmes &
Rempel, 1989) or perceptions of the partner’s regard for the self
(Murray, Bellavia, et al., 2003), should have parallel, and even
stronger, effects.
We included Bartholomew and Horowitz’s (1991) four-category
attachment measure in the background measures in Experiments 1,
2, and 4 – 8 to examine the former possibility. We then reconducted
the analyses in each experiment, using rejection anxiety as a
moderator in place of self-esteem. Although this measure does not

455

provide as sensitive a barometer as current ones (e.g., Fraley,
Waller, & Brennan, 2000), anxiety about rejection did reveal
effects that paralleled the moderating effects of self-esteem we
observed in Experiments 2, 4, and 7.16,17

Exploring Alternative Explanations
The risk regulation model contends that self-esteem moderates
people’s responses to risk because chronic expectations of a specific partner’s acceptance determine the calibration of the risk
regulation system. Alternate explanations are possible, however.
Perhaps low self-esteem people generally responded more selfprotectively to risk because the disappointment episodes they
generated disproportionately sampled experiences within romantic
relationships. To examine this possibility, we computed the correlation between self-esteem and the type of disappointment (romantic vs. not) in Experiments 1, 2, 5, and 6. The average correlation was near zero and nonsignificant in each experiment.
Maybe, though, high self-esteem, but not low self-esteem, people
sought greater interdependence in the face of risk because they
recalled less serious interpersonal disappointments in the first
place. If that were the case, the comparative caution of lows might
be an appropriate response to the contingencies they faced. To
examine this possibility, we coded the narratives in Experiments 2,
5, 6, and 7 for event severity (e.g., “Given the scope of things that
can happen in life, how serious is the event described?”). We then
reconducted our analyses including severity as a control variable.18
All of the main effects of condition and the moderating effects of
self-esteem remained significant.
16

Given the multiple ways one might tap expectations of a specific
partner’s acceptance and responsiveness— our hypothesized moderator—
readers might wonder why we focused on global self-esteem. We utilized
the Rosenberg (1965) measure because it captures stable, cross-situational
expectations of acceptance (Leary & Baumeister, 2000). Such expectations
should be more sensitive to the cross-situational manipulations of risk we
used in Experiments 1, 2, 5, and 6 than expectations that are specific to the
relationship. We also favored this measure for testing risk regulation
dynamics because it can tap negative evaluative associations to the self
without requiring people to articulate fears about rejection in relationships.
Consequently, it acts as a kind of projective test for capturing the kinds of
doubts about one’s worthiness that should create interpersonal problems
even for people who do not or cannot articulate these problems. Given that
our data suggest that much of low self-esteem people’s motivational
conflict may occur outside their awareness, such sensitivity is critical from
our perspective.
17
Some readers might wonder whether satisfaction moderates risk regulation dynamics. We do not believe that satisfaction is likely to be a strong
moderator because it represents an evaluative statement about the relationship that captures the outcome of such risk regulation dynamics (Murray et
al., 2006). For instance, self-esteem and perceptions of a partner’s regard
for the self predict changes in relationship satisfaction over time (Murray
et al., 2000). As an outcome variable, satisfaction should function as only
a poor proxy for the true moderating influences (i.e., self-esteem, perceived
regard). We included a one-item measure of relationship satisfaction as a
premeasure in each of the experiments to examine this logic. As we
expected, further analyses did not reveal any systematic and significant
moderating effects of satisfaction.
18
Participants in the experimental conditions consistently described
more serious and upsetting events than did control participants.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

456

MURRAY, DERRICK, LEDER, AND HOLMES

Alternately, low self-esteem people might have reacted to
heightened motivations to connect by distancing because priming
approach goals reduced regulatory fit and increased negative affect
(Higgins, 2000). If that were the case, the distancing effects
observed in Experiments 3, 4, and 8 might reflect the contaminating effect of negative mood or diminished state self-esteem on
relationship judgments (Schwarz, 1990). To examine this possibility, we reconducted our analyses, including the dependent measures of mood (Experiment 4) and state self-esteem (Experiments
3 and 8) as control variables. All of the main effects of condition
and the moderating effects of self-esteem remained significant. On
a related note, risk might have activated stronger self-protection
goals for low than high self-esteem people because risk generated
more negative affect for lows. Accordingly, we reexamined the
moderating effects of self-esteem observed in Experiments 2, 6,
and 7 in analyses that also controlled for mood. All of the main
effects of condition and the moderating effects of self-esteem
remained significant.

Optimizing Assurance by Regulating Risk
The present experiments provide strong and convergent support
for the operation of the risk regulation system. When the external
world signals risk, such experiences motivate people to seek safety
through connection to their romantic partner (Path A in Figure 1).
The desire to seek connection then primes self-protection goals
(Path C), triggering an executive control or stop– go system that
tells people which specific situations are safe to approach (Path E).
When operative, this control system directs low self-esteem, but
not high self-esteem, people away from situations of dependence
in their relationships, frustrating the goal of seeking greater connection (Path H). When realities within the relationship itself
signal risk, such experiences heighten the activation of selfprotection goals (Paths B and D), resulting in distancing efforts
that are evident both in people’s relatively more automatic associations to risk and in their behavioral intentions.
Our model of the risk regulation process complements theoretical perspectives on both self-regulation and the mental representation of interpersonal goals. In pursuing self-regulatory goals, low
self-esteem people generally are more self-protective than highs—
favoring those opportunities to affirm the self that seem safe
(Baumeister, Tice, & Hutton, 1989; Heimpel, Elliot, & Wood,
2006). For instance, low self-esteem people who desire interpersonal approval react to negative feedback about their likeability by
wanting to appear more physically attractive to others but not by
wanting to appear more warm—a more concrete and presumably
safer means of self-enhancement (Park & Crocker, in press). This
article extends such logic by illustrating how self-protection can
trump competing goal considerations for low self-esteem people in
relationships. Consistent with our emphasis on the goal conflict
inherent in specific relationship situations, attachment and social
cognition researchers argue that goals are central to the content of
significant-other representations (e.g., Collins & Read, 1994;
Mikulincer & Shaver, 2003). In fact, specific concrete goals, such
as seeking support, being cooperative, or being smart, are activated
automatically when significant-other representations are primed
(Baldwin, 1992; Fitzsimons & Bargh, 2003; Gillath et al., 2006;
Shah, 2003). The current results extend this research by illustrating

how specific (risky) situations can prompt the association of the
partner with conflicting goals.
Aspects of the risk regulation model require refinement. Subsequent research could examine whether correction might be preempted if repeated experience with a partner in a specific situation
has revealed little cause for concern. For instance, if Harry is
consistently reassuring when Sally voices worries about her
weight, this specific situation might cease to activate selfprotection goals. Consequently, Sally’s willingness to seek out
Harry for support in this domain might become automatic (and no
longer require the safety check afforded by the risk regulation
system). In contrast, if Harry is consistently critical when Sally
expresses an opinion contrary to his own, such situations might
cease to activate connectedness goals. Instead, Sally’s selfprotective decision to keep such opinions to herself might become
automatic, no longer requiring executive control to be enacted.
Thus, examining how experience tailors risk regulation processes
in repeatedly encountered situations remains an important task.
Subsequent research might also examine whether the output of
the risk regulation system is evident in behavioral responses that
require less deliberative control. Recent research has suggested
that people’s goal pursuits are evident in automatic evaluations
(Ferguson, 2007). This raises the possibility that situations that
involve dependence, such as seeking or providing support, might
evoke different automatic responses as a function of executive
strength. Risk might heighten positive implicit associations to
support-seeking situations for both low and high self-esteem people when cognitively busy. However, when low self-esteem people
have the executive strength necessary to correct, such situations
might elicit negative implicit evaluations. Subsequent research
might also examine the mechanisms internal to the control system,
examining whether the “if . . . then” contingencies surrounding
appraisal and signaling processes (Paths F and G in Figure 1) are
more likely to be activated when executive strength is intact than
when executive strength is usurped (as the model would anticipate).
Subsequent research might also extend the risk regulation model
to nonromantic relationship domains. Risk regulation dynamics
should be most pronounced in relationships where two conditions
are met: (a) Each partner’s dependence is volitional, and thus, each
partner must make decisions about how much dependence to risk;
and (b) rejection is painful because the value of the partner’s
regard and caring cannot be not easily substituted for by another
person’s. It is in such situations where people should need the
greatest sense of assurance that seeking connection is not likely to
result in rejection. Consequently, risk regulation dynamics might
be more pronounced in relationships between parents and adult
children or between best friends (DeHart, Murray, Pelham, &
Rose, 2003) than in relationships between parents and young
children or in relationships between casual friends or coworkers.
Further research might also examine whether features of people’s working models that are not available to consciousness
moderate risk regulation dynamics in ways that parallel the effects
of consciously considered beliefs. Examining the moderating effects of implicit self-esteem could be particularly fruitful. For
instance, people who are low on both implicit and explicit selfesteem might be so practiced in defending themselves against
rejection that avoidance becomes an automatic response to risk.
However, people with high implicit, but low explicit, self-esteem

RISK REGULATION

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

may possess a hidden resilience that strengthens the activation of
connectedness goals. In contrast, people with low implicit, but
high explicit, self-esteem may possess a hidden vulnerability that
strengthens the activation of self-protection goals (Jordan, Spencer, Zanna, Hoshino-Browne, & Correll, 2003). Working models
of self that convey such conflicting messages might then heighten
goal conflict (because one system prioritizes connectedness,
whereas the other prioritizes self-protection). Consequently, the
relationship behavior of such individuals should be highly ambivalent, especially in situations where executive strength and, thus,
the capacity to resolve such conflict are impaired.

The Self-Fulfilling Effects of Risk Regulation
As being hurt is an inevitable part of romantic life, the challenge
in maintaining a satisfying relationship rests in preventing such
situated threats from impeding connectedness goals. However, for
people with low self-esteem, the slightest offense is likely to be
seen as a sign of impending rejection, motivating them to selfprotect and distance themselves from the sting of any further
perceived slights. Such efforts to minimize risk would be appropriate if people with low self-esteem actually possessed partners
who valued and loved them less and treated them less well. This is
not the case (Murray, Holmes, & Griffin, 2000).
Inappropriately calibrated attempts to self-protect may result in
the people who most need to see signs of a partner’s acceptance
behaving in ways that undermine the resource of an admiring
partner that they need to preserve. For instance, women who
chronically anticipate rejection behave more negatively toward
their partner during conflicts and elicit more rejecting behavior in
that specific instance (Downey, Freitas, Michaelis, & Khouri,
1998). Moreover, on days after rejection-sensitive women feel
acutely rejected by their dating partner, their partner reports greater
dissatisfaction (Downey et al., 1998). In the diary study reported
by Murray, Bellavia, et al. (2003), the spouses of people who felt
less positively regarded (correctly) believed they were the target of
more hurtful and rejecting behaviors on days after lows had felt
most rejected—and it was only then that they actually became
annoyed and rejecting toward their partner.
By putting self-protection at a greater premium than connection,
people who feel less positively regarded, such as those low in
self-esteem, may create long-term interpersonal realities that defeat their hopes and confirm their fears. Supporting this analysis, a
longitudinal daily diary study of married couples suggested that
the chronic activation of dependence-minimizing behaviors has a
corrosive effect on relationships over time (Murray, Bellavia, et
al., 2003; Murray, Griffin, et al., 2003). Specifically, men were
more likely to become dissatisfied over the year when women’s
behavioral response to feeling rejected was to self-protect and to
behave negatively toward their spouse (Murray, Griffin, et al.,
2003).

Conclusion
Negotiating romantic life necessitates continual efforts to resolve a constantly and newly unfolding conflict between connectedness and self-protection goals. Ironically, the situations that
offer the greatest opportunity to satiate connectedness goals, such
as situations where a partner’s support or sacrifice is needed, are

457

the situations where rejection hurts the most (Kelley, 1979). The
risk regulation system operates to resolve this conflict, optimizing
feelings of assurance by directing people toward situations that
seem to offer a safe level of dependence. Unfortunately, for people
low in self-esteem, this regulation system is overly conservative,
prioritizing self-protection to a degree that undermines the bonds
they want to create.

References
Aarts, H., Dijksterhuis, A., & De Vries, P. (2001). On the psychology of
drinking: Being thirsty and perceptually ready. British Journal of Psychology, 92, 631– 642.
Aiken, L. S., & West, S. G. (1991). Multiple regression: Testing and
interpreting interactions. New York: Sage.
Aron, A., Aron, E. N., Tudor, M., & Nelson, G. (1991). Close relationships
as including other in the self. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 60, 241–253.
Baldwin, M. W. (1992). Relational schemas and the processing of social
information. Psychological Bulletin, 112, 461– 484.
Bargh, J. A., & Ferguson, M. J. (2000). Beyond behaviorism: On the
automaticity of higher mental processes. Psychological Bulletin, 126,
925–945.
Bartholomew, K., & Horowitz, L. M. (1991). Attachment styles among
young adults: A test of a four-category model. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 61, 226 –244.
Baumeister, R. F., Bratslavsky, E., Muraven, M., & Tice, D. M. (1998).
Ego depletion: Is the active self a limited resource? Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 74, 1252–1265.
Baumeister, R. F., & Leary, M. R. (1995). The need to belong: Desire for
interpersonal attachments as a fundamental human motivation. Psychological Bulletin, 117, 497–529.
Baumeister, R. F., Tice, D. M., & Hutton, D. G. (1989). Self-presentational
motivations and personality differences in self-esteem. Journal of Personality, 57, 547–579.
Baumeister, R. F., Wotman, S. R., & Stillwell, A. M. (1993). Unrequited
love: On heartbreak, anger, guilt, scriptlessness, and humiliation. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 64, 377–394.
Bellavia, G., & Murray, S. L. (2003). Did I do that? Self esteem-related
differences in reactions to romantic partners’ moods. Personal Relationships, 10, 77–96.
Berenson, K. R., & Andersen, S. M. (2006). Childhood physical and
emotional abuse by a parent: Transference effects in adult interpersonal
relations. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 32, 1509 –1522.
Bowlby, J. (1969). Attachment and loss: Vol. 1. Attachment. London:
Hogarth Press.
Cacioppo, J. T., Gardner, W. L., & Berntson, G. G. (1999). The affect
system has parallel and integrative processing components: Form follows function. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 76, 839 –
855.
Carver, C. S., Sutton, S. K., & Scheier, M. F. (2007). Action, emotion and
personality: Emerging conceptual integration. Personality and Social
Psychology Bulletin, 25, 741–751.
Clark, M. S., & Grote, N. K. (1998). Why aren’t indices of relationship
costs always negatively related to indices of relationship quality? Personality and Social Psychology Review, 2, 2–17.
Collins, N. L., & Feeney, B. C. (2000). A safe haven: An attachment theory
perspective on support seeking and caregiving in intimate relationships.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 78, 1053–1073.
Collins, N. L., & Read, S. J. (1994). Cognitive representations of attachment: The structure and function of working models. In K. Bartholomew
& D. Perlman (Eds.), Advances in personal relationships: Vol. 5. Attachment processes in adulthood (pp. 53–90). Greenwich, CT: JAI
Press.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

458

MURRAY, DERRICK, LEDER, AND HOLMES

Crocker, J., & Wolfe, C. T. (2001). Contingencies of self-worth. Psychological Review, 108, 593– 623.
DeHart, T., Murray, S. L., Pelham, B., & Rose, P. (2003). The regulation
of dependency in parent– child relationships. Journal of Experimental
Social Psychology, 39, 59 – 67.
Deutsch, M., & Krauss, R. M. (1965). Theories in social psychology. New
York: Basic Books.
Dodgson, P. G., & Wood, J. V. (1998). Self-esteem and the cognitive
accessibility of strengths and weaknesses after failure. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 75, 178 –197.
Dollard, J., & Miller, N. E. (1950). Personality and psychotherapy. New
York: McGraw-Hill.
Downey, G., & Feldman, S. I. (1996). Implications of rejection sensitivity
for intimate relationships. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
70, 1327–1343.
Downey, G., Freitas, A. L., Michaelis, B., & Khouri, H. (1998). The
self-fulfilling prophecy in close relationships: Rejection sensitivity and
rejection by romantic partners. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 75, 545–560.
Elliot, A. J., & Fryer, J. W. (in press). The goal construct in psychology.
In J. Y. Shah & W. L. Gardner (Eds.), Handbook of motivation science.
New York: Guilford Press.
Elliot, A. J., Gable, S. L., & Mapes, R. R. (2006). Approach and avoidance
motivation in the social domain. Personality and Social Psychology
Bulletin, 32, 378 –391.
Epstein, S. (1982). Conflict and stress. In L. Goldberger & S. Breznitz
(Eds.), Handbook of stress: Theoretical and clinical aspects (pp. 49 –
68). New York: Free Press.
Fazio, R. H. (1990). A practical guide to the use of response latency in
social psychological research. In C. Hendrick & M. S. Clark (Eds.),
Review of personality and social psychology (Vol. 11, pp. 74 –97).
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Ferguson, M. J. (2007). On the automatic evaluation of end-states. Journal
of Personality and Social Psychology, 92, 596 – 611.
Fitzsimons, G. M., & Bargh, J. A. (2003). Thinking of you: Nonconscious
pursuit of interpersonal goals associated with relationship partners. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 84, 148 –163.
Fraley, R. C., Waller, N. G., & Brennan, K. A. (2000). An item response
theory analysis of self-report measures of adult attachment. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 78, 350 –365.
Gable, S. L. (2005). Approach and avoidance social motives and goals.
Journal of Personality, 74, 175–222.
Gable, S. L., Reis, H. T., & Elliot, A. J. (2000). Behavioral activation and
inhibition in everyday life. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 78, 1135–1149.
Gagne, F. M., & Lydon, J. E. (2004). Bias and accuracy in close relationships: An integrative review. Personality and Social Psychology Review,
8, 322–338.
Gardner, W. L., Pickett, C. L., & Brewer, M. B. (2000). Social exclusion
and selective memory: How the need to belong influences memory for
social events. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 26, 486 – 496.
Gardner, W. L., Pickett, C. L., Jefferis, V., & Knowles, M. (2005). On the
outside looking in: Loneliness and social monitoring. Personality and
Social Psychology Bulletin, 31, 1549 –1560.
Gilbert, D. T. (1989). Thinking lightly about others: Automatic components of the social inference process. In J. S. Uleman & J. A. Bargh
(Eds.), Unintended thought (pp. 189 –211). New York: Guilford Press.
Gilbert, D. T., Pelham, B. W., & Krull, D. S. (1988). On cognitive
busyness: When person perceivers meet persons perceived. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 54, 733–740.
Gillath, O., Mikulincer, M., Fitzsimons, G. M., Shaver, P. R., Schachner,
D. A., & Bargh, J. A. (2006). Automatic activation of attachment-related
goals. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 32, 1375–1388.
Goldsmith, D. J., McDermott, V. M., & Alexander, S. C. (2000). Helpful,

supportive, and sensitive: Measuring the evaluation of enacted social
support in personal relationships. Journal of Social and Personal Relationships, 17, 369 –391.
Hall, C. S., & Lindzey, G. (1957). Theories of personality. New York:
Wiley.
Heimpel, S. A., Elliot, A. J., & Wood, J. V. (2006). Basic personality
dispositions, self-esteem, and personal goals: An approach-avoidance
analysis. Journal of Personality, 74, 1293–1319.
Higgins, E. T. (1996). The “self digest”: Self-knowledge serving selfregulatory functions. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 71,
1062–1083.
Higgins, E. T. (1998). Promotion and prevention: Regulatory focus as a
motivational principle. In M. P. Zanna (Ed.), Advances in experimental
social psychology (Vol. 30, pp. 1– 46). New York: Academic Press.
Higgins, E. T. (2000). Making a good decision: Value from fit. American
Psychologist, 55, 1217–1230.
Holmes, J. G., & Rempel, J. K. (1989). Trust in close relationships. In C.
Hendrick (Ed.), Review of personality and social psychology: Vol. 10.
Close relationships (pp. 187–219). Newburg Park, CA: Sage.
Jordan, C. H., Spencer, S. J., Zanna, M. P., Hoshino-Browne, E., & Correll,
J. (2003). Secure and defensive high self-esteem. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 85, 969 –978.
Kelley, H. H. (1979). Personal relationships: Their structures and processes. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Kunda, Z., & Spencer, S. J. (2003). When do stereotypes come to mind and
when do they color judgment? A goal-based theoretical framework for
stereotype activation and application. Psychological Bulletin, 129, 522–
544.
Leary, M. R., & Baumeister, R. F. (2000). The nature and function of
self-esteem: Sociometer theory. In M. P. Zanna (Ed.), Advances in
experimental social psychology (Vol. 32, pp. 2–51). San Diego, CA:
Academic Press.
Leary, M. R., Tambor, E. S., Terdal, S. K., & Downs, D. L. (1995).
Self-esteem as an interpersonal monitor: The sociometer hypothesis.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 68, 518 –530.
Lockwood, P., Jordan, C. H., & Kunda, Z. (2002). Motivation by positive
or negative role models: Regulatory focus determines who will best
inspire us. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 83, 854 – 864.
MacDonald, G., & Leary, M. R. (2005). Why does social exclusion hurt?
The relationship between social and physical pain. Psychological Bulletin, 131, 202–223.
Macrae, C. N., Bodenhausen, G. V., Schloerscheidt, A. M., & Milne, A. B.
(1999). Tales of the unexpected: Executive function and person perception. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 76, 200 –213.
Macrae, C. N., & Johnston, L. (1998). Help, I need somebody: Automatic
action and inaction. Social Cognition, 16, 400 – 417.
Maner, J. K., DeWall, C. N., Baumeister, R. F., & Schaller, M. (2007).
Does social exclusion motivate interpersonal reconnection? Resolving
the “porcupine problem.” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
92, 42–55.
Mikulincer, M. (1998). Attachment working models and the sense of trust:
An exploration of interaction goals and affect regulation. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 74, 1209 –1224.
Mikulincer, M., Birnbaum, G., Woddis, D., & Nachmias, O. (2000). Stress
and accessibility of proximity-related thoughts: Exploring the normative
and intraindividual components of attachment theory. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 78, 509 –523.
Mikulincer, M., Gillath, O., & Shaver, P. R. (2002). Activation of the
attachment system in adulthood: Threat-related primes increase the
accessibility of mental representations of attachment figures. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 83, 881– 895.
Mikulincer, M., & Shaver, P. R. (2003). The attachment behavioral system
in adulthood: Activation, psychodynamics, and interpersonal processes.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

RISK REGULATION
In M. P. Zanna (Ed.), Advances in experimental social psychology (Vol.
35, pp. 52–153). New York: Academic Press.
Muraven, M., & Baumeister, R. F. (2000). Self-regulation and depletion of
limited resources: Does self-control resemble a muscle? Psychological
Bulletin, 126, 247–259.
Murray, S. L. (1999). The quest for conviction: Motivated cognition in
romantic relationships. Psychological Inquiry, 10, 23–34.
Murray, S. L., Aloni, M., Holmes, J. G., Derrick, J. L., Anthony, D., &
Leder, S. (2007). Fostering partner dependence as commitment insurance: The implicit contingencies of exchange in close relationships.
Unpublished manuscript, University at Buffalo, The State University of
New York.
Murray, S. L., Bellavia, G., Rose, P., & Griffin, D. (2003). Once hurt, twice
hurtful: How perceived regard regulates daily marital interaction. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 84, 126 –147.
Murray, S. L., Griffin, D. W., Rose, P., & Bellavia, G. (2003). Calibrating
the sociometer: The relational contingencies of self-esteem. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 85, 63– 84.
Murray, S. L., Holmes, J. G., & Collins, N. L. (2006). Optimizing assurance: The risk regulation system in relationships. Psychological Bulletin,
132, 641– 666.
Murray, S. L., Holmes, J. G., & Griffin, D. W. (2000). Self-esteem and the
quest for felt security: How perceived regard regulates attachment processes. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 78, 478 – 498.
Murray, S. L., Holmes, J. G., Griffin, D. W., Bellavia, G., & Rose, P.
(2001). The mismeasure of love: How self-doubt contaminates relationship beliefs. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 27, 423– 436.
Murray, S. L., Holmes, J. G., MacDonald, G., & Ellsworth, P. (1998).
Through the looking glass darkly? When self-doubts turn into relationship insecurities. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 75,
1459 –1480.
Murray, S. L., Rose, P., Bellavia, G., Holmes, J., & Kusche, A. (2002).
When rejection stings: How self-esteem constrains relationshipenhancement processes. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
83, 556 –573.
Neal, D. T., Wood, W., & Quinn, J. M. (2006). Habits—A repeat performance. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 15, 198 –202.
Nezlek, J. B., Kowalski, R. M., Leary, M. R., Blevins, T., & Holgate, S.
(1997). Personality moderators of reactions to interpersonal rejection:
Depression and trait self-esteem. Personality and Social Psychology
Bulletin, 23, 1235–1244.
Park, L. E., & Crocker, J. (in press). Contingencies of self-worth and
responses to negative interpersonal feedback. Self and Identity.
Pickett, C. L., Gardner, W. L., & Knowles, M. (2004). Getting a cue: The
need to belong and enhanced sensitivity to social cues. Personality and
Social Psychology Bulletin, 30, 1095–1107.

459

Reis, H. T., Clark, M. S., & Holmes, J. G. (2004). Perceived partner
responsiveness as an organizing construct in the study of intimacy and
closeness. In D. Mashek & A. P. Aron (Eds.), Handbook of closeness
and intimacy (pp. 201–225). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Rosenberg, M. (1965). Society and the adolescent self-image. Princeton,
NJ: Princeton University Press.
Rusbult, C. E., Verette, J., Whitney, G. A., Slovik, L. F., & Lipkus, I.
(1991). Accommodation processes in close relationships: Theory and
preliminary empirical evidence. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 60, 53–78.
Schwarz, N. (1990). Feelings as information: Informational and motivational functions of affective states. In E. T. Higgins & R. M. Sorrentino
(Eds.), Handbook of motivation and cognition: Foundations of social
behavior (Vol. 2, pp. 527–561). New York: Guilford Press.
Shah, J. (2003). Automatic for the people: How representations of significant others implicitly affect goal pursuit. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 84, 661– 681.
Shah, J., Friedman, R., & Kruglanski, A. W. (2002). Forgetting all else: On
the antecedents and consequences of goal shielding. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 83, 1261–1280.
Tooby, J., & Cosmides, L. (1996). Friendship and the banker’s paradox:
Other pathways to the evolution of adaptations for altruism. Proceedings
of the British Academy, 88, 119 –143.
Twenge, J. M., Baumeister, R. F., DeWall, C. N., Ciarocco, N. J., &
Bartels, J. M. (2007). Social exclusion decreases prosocial behavior.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 92, 56 – 66.
Twenge, J. M., Baumeister, R. F., Tice, D. M., & Stucke, T. S. (2001). If
you can’t join them, beat them: Effects of social exclusion on aggressive
behavior. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 81, 1058 –1069.
Williams, K. D., Cheung, C. K. T., & Choi, W. (2001). Cyberostracism:
Effects of being ignored over the Internet. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 79, 748 –762.
Williams, K. D., & Sommer, K. L. (1997). Social ostracism by coworkers:
Does rejection lead to loafing or compensation? Personality and Social
Psychology Bulletin, 23, 693–706.
Wilson, T. D. (2002). Strangers to ourselves: Discovering the adaptive
unconscious. Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press.
Winer, B. J. (1971). Statistical principles in experimental design (2nd ed.).
New York: McGraw-Hill.
Zimet, G. D., Dehlem, N. W., Zimet, S. G., & Farley, G. K. (1988). The
Multidimensional Scale of Perceived Social Support. Journal of Personality Assessment, 52, 30 – 41.

Received May 9, 2007
Revision received July 20, 2007
Accepted July 31, 2007 䡲

