Journal of Personality and Social Psychology
2008, Vol. 95, No. 2, 274 –292

Copyright 2008 by the American Psychological Association
0022-3514/08/$12.00 DOI: 10.1037/0022-3514.95.2.274

Self-Handicapping, Excuse Making, and Counterfactual Thinking:
Consequences for Self-Esteem and Future Motivation
Sean M. McCrea

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

University of Konstanz
Researchers interested in counterfactual thinking have often found that upward counterfactual thoughts
lead to increased motivation to improve in the future, although at the cost of increased negative affect.
The present studies suggest that because upward counterfactual thoughts indicate reasons for a poor
performance, they can also serve as excuses. In this case, upward counterfactual thoughts should result
in more positive self-esteem and reduced future motivation. Five studies demonstrated these effects in the
context of self-handicapping. First, upward counterfactual thinking was increased in the presence of a
self-handicap. Second, upward counterfactual thoughts indicating the presence of a self-handicap
protected self-esteem following failure. Finally, upward counterfactual thoughts that protect self-esteem
reduced preparation for a subsequent performance as well as performance itself. These findings suggest
that the consequences of upward counterfactuals for affect and motivation are moderated by the goals of
the individual as well as the content of the thoughts.
Keywords: counterfactual thinking, self-handicapping, self-protection, motivation

lead to greater intentions to prepare, greater task effort, and improved performance (Markman et al., 1993; Markman, McMullen,
& Elizaga, 2008; Myers & McCrea, 2008; Roese, 1994), suggesting that upward counterfactual thoughts often serve a preparative
function. Several possible processes underlying this effect have
been suggested, although they may operate in tandem and are not
mutually exclusive (Epstude & Roese, 2008). Thinking “If I had
studied more I would have gotten an A” might lead to increased
studying because the individual is less satisfied with his or her
performance and thus more motivated to improve (Markman &
McMullen, 2003; Markman et al., 2008; Myers & McCrea, 2008),
because the thought identifies a potentially useful behavior (Epstude & Roese, 2008; Roese, 1994; Roese & Olson, 1995b), or
because the individual experiences increased self-efficacy (Tal-Or,
Boninger, & Gleicher, 2004). Supporting the proposed motivational benefits of counterfactual thinking, numerous studies have
shown that performance benefits of counterfactual thinking only
occur when accompanied by negative affect (Markman et al.,
2008; McMullen & Markman, 2000; Myers & McCrea, 2008).
Thus, counterfactual thinking appears to involve a tradeoff of
protecting affect for improving future performance.
More recent research has suggested that these consequences of
upward and downward counterfactual thinking can also be reversed. The Reflection Evaluation Model (Markman & McMullen,
2003; Markman et al., 2008; McMullen, 1997) holds that focusing
individuals on the counterfactual alternative (i.e., reflection) rather
than on a comparison of this alternative with the obtained outcome
(i.e., evaluation) leads to more positive affect as a result of making
upward compared to downward counterfactuals and increased
preparation and motivation as a result of making downward compared to upward counterfactuals. Thus, fantasizing that an outcome
could have been better leads to more positive affect, which in turn
undermines efforts to improve in the future (Markman & McMullen, 2003; Markman et al., 2008). Outcomes that cannot be

Counterfactual thinking involves considering how a past event
could have been better or worse. Those thoughts that identify how
an outcome could have been worse (e.g., “At least I passed the test,
I could have failed”) are referred to as downward thoughts,
whereas those that identify how an outcome could have been better
(e.g., “If I had studied more, I could have gotten an A”) are
referred to as upward thoughts (Markman, Gavanski, Sherman, &
McMullen, 1993, 1995; Roese, 1994).
An extensive body of research has documented the consequences of these thoughts for affect and subsequent behavior (for
reviews, see Epstude & Roese, 2008; Markman & McMullen,
2003; Roese & Olson, 1995a; Sanna, Carter, & Small, 2006).
Previous research on counterfactual thinking has found that individuals often compare counterfactual alternatives to reality, leading to an affective contrast effect (Markman & McMullen, 2003;
McMullen, 1997). Thus, upward counterfactual thoughts can lead
to more negative affect, whereas downward counterfactual
thoughts can lead to maintained or more positive affect (Boninger,
Gleicher, & Strathman, 1994; Markman et al., 1993, 1995; Roese,
1994). These findings led to the conclusion that downward counterfactuals often serve an affective (i.e., mood maintenance) function (Markman et al., 1993; Roese, 1994).
In terms of the behavioral consequences of counterfactual thinking, past researchers have often found that upward counterfactuals

This research was completed with the support of a dissertation fellowship from Indiana University and research grants from the University of
Konstanz (AFF 13/05) and the German Research Foundation (DFG MC
68/1-1). I wish to especially thank Ed Hirt, Jim Sherman, Russ Fazio, Nira
Liberman, and Sarah Queller for their helpful suggestions in this research,
and Stefanie Hehn and Ruprecht Lindhorst for serving as experimenters.
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Sean M.
McCrea, Department of Psychology, Fach D-39, University of Konstanz,
78457 Konstanz, Germany. E-mail: Sean.McCrea@uni-konstanz.de
274

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

SELF-HANDICAPPING AND EXCUSING COUNTERFACTUALS

changed and outcome accountability also tend to evoke affective
contrast effects of counterfactual thinking, whereas the possibility
to change an outcome in the future and process accountability tend
to evoke affective assimilation effects of counterfactual thinking
(Boninger et al., 1994; Markman & Tetlock, 2000a; McMullen &
Markman, 2002).
The present article suggests that another variable that can moderate the affective and motivational consequences of upward counterfactual thinking is the desire to excuse poor performances and
protect self-esteem. Consider for a moment the thought, “If I had
studied more, I could have gotten an A.” In those cases in which
the individual is motivated to achieve, such a thought would lead
one to experience disappointment and self-directed anger because
a better outcome could have been obtained. These emotions would
in turn motivate efforts to improve subsequent academic performance. This type of effect has been documented extensively in
counterfactual studies (e.g., Markman et al., 1993, 2008; Myers &
McCrea, 2008; Roese, 1994). However, in situations in which the
individual is motivated by self-protection concerns, the same
thought could be used to suggest that a poor grade was due to a
lack of effort rather than a lack of ability or intelligence. As a
result, one might expect this same type of thought to protect
self-esteem following a failure (thus serving an affective function)
but undermine motivation to improve.
There is of course a large literature demonstrating that the
impact of performance feedback on self-esteem is moderated by
attribution processes. Failures lead to lower self-esteem when
attributed to internal stable causes, such as ability, than when
attributed to external or unstable causes, such as low effort or task
difficulty (Covington & Omelich, 1979; McFarland & Ross, 1982;
Weiner, 1985). Research on counterfactual thinking has shown
that there are also close links between these thoughts and causal
judgments, particularly blame assignment, although they do not
completely overlap with attribution processes (Branscombe, Wohl,
Owen, Allison, & N⬘Gbala, 2003; Creyer & Guerhan, 1997; Mandel, 2003; Mandel & Lehman, 1996; Wells & Gavanski, 1989).
For example, one could say a fire destroyed the house but that this
outcome could have been prevented had the fire department responded more quickly. It is therefore likely that the ramifications
of counterfactual thoughts for blame and responsibility should
influence subsequent affect and self-esteem, independent of attribution processes. Counterfactual thoughts blaming low ability for
a poor performance are likely to result in decreased self-esteem,
relative to counterfactuals placing blame on more unstable factors
(see also Covington & Omelich, 1979; Weiner, 1985).
Indeed, research has demonstrated that counterfactuals mutating
aspects of the self as opposed to more external factors have more
negative consequences for emotion and well-being following a
negative event. For example, counterfactuals that mutate aspects of
the self following a failure lead to increased shame (Niedenthal,
Tangney, & Gavanski, 1994) and regret (Sevdalis & Kokkinaki,
2006), and agreement with such thoughts predicts increased selfblame and worse psychological well-being following a traumatic
event (Branscombe et al., 2003). Individuals also demonstrate a
number of self- and group-protective biases in counterfactual
thinking. For example, following a negative outcome, individuals
are more likely to generate counterfactuals indicating that it was
unforeseeable (Markman & Tetlock, 2000b). They are also more
likely to agree with upward counterfactuals when seeking to lower

275

expectations for future performances (Sanna, Chang, & Meier,
2001). Following a failure relevant for the self or an ingroup,
individuals tend to mutate external factors more than they do
internal factors; conversely, following a success, they tend to
mutate internal factors more than they do external factors (Goerke,
Möller, Schulz-Hardt, Napiersky, & Frey, 2004; Roese & Olson,
1993). This pattern of counterfactual mutation is not found or is
reversed for the outcomes of others (McCrea, 2007; Roese &
Olson, 1993). Thus, there is increasing evidence that counterfactual thoughts are biased by self-protection concerns. However, to
date there has not been direct evidence for the use of counterfactuals to blame poor outcomes on unstable factors (such as lack of
effort) nor has research examined the consequences of such
thoughts for self-esteem and motivation.

Self-Handicapping
The current studies sought to provide evidence for the ability of
upward counterfactuals to excuse poor performances in the context
of self-handicapping. Self-handicapping involves creating or
claiming an obstacle prior to a performance (Berglas & Jones,
1978; Jones & Berglas, 1978). In the event of a failure, one can
point to the self-handicap as the reason a better outcome was not
obtained and thereby protect self-esteem and conceptions of ability
(Feick & Rhodewalt, 1997; McCrea & Hirt, 2001; Rhodewalt,
Morf, Hazlett, & Fairfield, 1991). Past research has shown that
individuals use a variety of strategies to self-handicap, including
withdrawing effort (Hirt, Deppe, & Gordon, 1991; Hirt, McCrea,
& Kimble, 2000), listening to distracting music (Shepperd &
Arkin, 1989b), or ingesting drugs or alcohol (Berglas & Jones,
1978; Jones & Berglas, 1978) prior to an important exam or
performance. Self-handicapping is more likely to occur when
individuals are feeling uncertain about an important performance.
For example, receiving noncontingent success feedback (Berglas
& Jones, 1978) or experiencing uncertainty and concern as a result
of public self-focus (Hirt et al., 2000) increases self-handicapping.
Men are also more willing to engage in active, behavioral forms of
self-handicapping, such as withdrawal of preparation effort, taking
drugs or alcohol, or listening to distracting music, than are women
(Hirt et al., 1991, 2000; McCrea, Hirt, & Milner, 2008; Rhodewalt,
1990; Shepperd & Arkin, 1989b). This difference appears to be
due to the fact that women place more value on putting forth one’s
best effort than do men (McCrea, Hirt, Hendrix, Milner, & Steele,
in press; McCrea et al., 2008).
Research has also demonstrated that self-handicapping is effective in protecting self-esteem and conceptions of ability in the face
of failure. Specifically, the presence of a handicap allows individuals to shift attributions for a poor performance from ability to the
handicap (Feick & Rhodewalt, 1997; McCrea & Hirt, 2001;
Rhodewalt et al., 1991). In addition, self-handicapping maintains
self-evaluations of ability in a specific domain, as well as global
self-esteem, despite failure (Feick & Rhodewalt, 1997; McCrea &
Hirt, 2001).

Counterfactual Thinking and Self-Handicapping
Given the relationship between counterfactual thinking, blame
assignment, and affect, as well as the reliance of the selfhandicapping strategy on manipulating subsequent attributions, it

MCCREA

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

276

may prove interesting to examine the role of counterfactual thinking in self-handicapping. S. J. Sherman and McConnell (1995)
noted that, by deliberately creating obstacles to success, the selfhandicapping strategy appears to increase the likelihood that upward counterfactuals will be generated. Self-handicaps are likely
to be the focus of counterfactual explanations for a poor performance because they represent an “abnormal” condition (Kahneman & Miller, 1986). However, at least with regard to self-esteem,
the consequences of upward counterfactuals that identify a selfhandicap are likely to be positive rather than negative. That is, in
the context of self-handicapping, thinking “If I had studied more,
I would have gotten an A” should maintain self-esteem following
a poor performance (S. J. Sherman & McConnell, 1995). Thus,
counterfactuals are particularly likely to excuse failure when the
thought identifies a salient self-handicap. In attribution terms,
counterfactuals that identify unstable factors as having prevented a
better performance should serve to protect self-esteem following
failure (see also Covington & Omelich, 1979; Weiner, 1985).
In addition to examining the consequences of using excusing
upward counterfactual thoughts for self-esteem, the present studies
examine how future motivation is likely to be impacted. If increased motivation resulting from counterfactual thinking is dependent upon the experience of negative affect, then it may not
occur for upward thoughts that identify an excuse for failure. That
is, an excuse may allow the individual to be satisfied with his or
her performance despite failure, thus eliminating the motivation to
improve in the future. Interestingly, this would suggest that selfhandicapping on an initial performance is likely to decrease motivation to improve. As a result, preparatory effort and subsequent
performance should suffer. This prediction, although untested to
date, would potentially account for past findings that selfhandicapping behavior can undermine long-term academic performance (McCrea & Hirt, 2001; Urdan, 2004; Zuckerman, Kieffer,
& Knee, 1998).

Study 1––Counterfactuals in the Classroom
Study 1 sought to provide initial evidence for the use of upward
counterfactuals as excuses in a situation in which individuals
would be motivated by self-protection concerns. Specifically, participants generated counterfactual thoughts following a midterm
examination in their psychology course in which a lack of study
effort could have served as a self-handicap. Individuals reporting
low preparatory effort for the course exam were expected to
generate more upward counterfactual thoughts about their effort
relative to those reporting high preparatory effort for the exam.
Furthermore, controlling for reported effort, individuals were expected to experience higher self-esteem as a result of generating
upward counterfactuals about a lack of effort. Given that past work
has shown that upward counterfactuals involve a tradeoff of increased negative affect for increased preparative intentions and
performance (Markman et al., 1993; Myers & McCrea, 2008;
Roese, 1994), individuals using upward counterfactuals to excuse
a poor performance should experience less dissatisfaction and
therefore be less motivated to improve in the future. Thus, individuals generating more upward counterfactuals about effort
should report higher intentions to prepare in the future but only
when these thoughts are accompanied by lower self-esteem. These
effects of counterfactual thinking were expected to be limited to

those specifically related to the handicap. Given that other counterfactuals are likely to mutate a mix of external and internal,
stable and unstable factors, no predictions were made with regard
to the effects of thoughts unrelated to the handicap for self-esteem
or subsequent motivation.
Finally, attributions to effort were measured to assess whether
effects of counterfactual thinking occurred independently of causal
attribution. Based on previous research showing that counterfactual thinking and attribution are related but independent processes
(Mandel, 2003; Mandel & Lehman, 1996), it was predicted that
effort attributions would show similar effects but would not account for the effects of counterfactuals concerning the handicap.

Method
Participants
Participants were 125 (35 men, 90 women) Indiana University
students in two sections of a social psychology course who participated in return for extra credit in the course. There was no
mention of self-handicapping or counterfactual thought in either
class. Both sections used the same text, the same test format, and
the same timing of the test.

Materials and Procedure
Study 1 involved three sessions, following the methods of
McCrea and Hirt (2001). The first session occurred at the beginning of the semester. The second occurred approximately 1 week
before a midterm exam in the course. The third occurred approximately 1 week after the exam, immediately after participants
learned their score.
Session 1. Participants were told that the experimenters were
interested in how students at large and small universities prepare
for exams. They completed a detailed informed consent form and
were assured their responses would be kept confidential, being
identified only by a unique code. They were asked to complete a
personality profile that included Rosenberg’s (1965) self-esteem
measure, answering on a 1 (strongly agree) to 7 (strongly disagree) scale.
Session 2. Participants were told that the researchers were
interested in a number of factors, such as class size, that might
influence how students prepare for tests. Participants were asked to
complete several demographic measures, to provide their most
recent GPA (high school or college) and college entrance exam
scores (on a scale ranging from 1 ⫽ ⬍600 SAT or ⬍18 ACT to
10 ⫽ 1500 –1600 SAT or 34 –36 ACT), and to complete several
items concerning the characteristics of their class and the instructor
to solidify the cover story.
Session 3. The final session occurred immediately after participants learned their score on the test. Participants indicated their
score (percent correct) on the exam. They were then asked to list
any thoughts they had about their test score. Thus, there were no
explicit instructions concerning counterfactual thoughts. Participants then were asked whether their performance was due to their
amount of effort, rated on a scale ranging from 1 (disagree very
much) to 7 (agree very much), and completed a measure of mood
and self-esteem. They indicated to what extent they felt each of 30
mood and self-esteem adjectives (adapted from McFarland &

SELF-HANDICAPPING AND EXCUSING COUNTERFACTUALS

277

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Table 1
Future Study Intention Interitem Correlations (Study 1; N ⫽ 125)
Item

Textbook

Flashcards

Asking instructor

Asking others

Office hours

Review session

Days

Overall

Textbook
Flashcards
Asking instructor
Asking others
Office hours
Review session
Days
Overall
M
SD

––
.42ⴱⴱⴱ
.20ⴱ
.29ⴱⴱ
.36ⴱⴱⴱ
.35ⴱⴱⴱ
.41ⴱⴱⴱ
.63ⴱⴱⴱ
4.90
1.56

––
.27ⴱⴱ
.39ⴱⴱⴱ
.35ⴱⴱⴱ
.38ⴱⴱⴱ
.33ⴱⴱⴱ
.47ⴱⴱⴱ
3.14
2.49

––
.49ⴱⴱⴱ
.48ⴱⴱⴱ
.37ⴱⴱⴱ
.13
.23ⴱⴱ
2.08
1.78

––
.42ⴱⴱⴱ
.39ⴱⴱⴱ
.32ⴱⴱⴱ
.35ⴱⴱⴱ
2.40
1.98

––
.46ⴱⴱⴱ
.38ⴱⴱⴱ
.50ⴱⴱⴱ
1.54
1.70

––
.44ⴱⴱⴱ
.46ⴱⴱⴱ
3.24
2.41

––
.40ⴱⴱⴱ
5.25
3.66

––
5.98
0.96

ⴱ

p ⬍ .05.

ⴱⴱ

p ⬍ .01.

ⴱⴱⴱ

p ⬍ .001.

Ross, 1982) at that moment using a 1 (not at all) to 7 (very much)
scale.
They next indicated how much effort they had put into studying
for the exam (see also McCrea & Hirt, 2001). Participants completed measures assessing how much they had read the textbook,
attended office hours, went to review sessions, used flash cards,
asked the instructor questions, and asked other students questions.
They responded to these items using a 0 (not at all) to 6 (great
deal) scale. They also indicated how hard they had studied overall
on a 1 (not at all) to 7 (very much) scale and reported how many
days before the exam they had studied. Finally, participants reported their intentions to study for the next exam in the class using
the same items. At the end of the final session, the full purpose of
the experiment, reason for the use of deception, and expected
results were discussed with participants. The confidentiality of
their responses was again stressed.

Results
Overview
Regression analyses were utilized due to the continuous nature
of the data. All variables were centered around the mean and
significant interactions were probed using simple-slope tests calculated at ⫾1 standard deviation from the mean (Aiken & West,
1991). Predicted scores were plotted at ⫾1 standard deviation from
the mean and 95% confidence intervals for the simple slopes were
also calculated (Tabachnik & Fidell, 2001). Reported study effort
items were highly correlated, as were the future study intention
items. They were therefore standardized and summed to form
single indices (reported study effort ␣ ⫽ .69; future study intentions ␣ ⫽ .83). Means, standard deviations, and interitem correlations for the future study intention items are provided in Table 1.
Based on correlational and reliability analyses, a postexam state
self-esteem index (worthless, depressed, incompetent, stupid, inadequate, shame; ␣ ⫽ .96) and a positive mood index (joyful,
delighted, happy, excited, glad, satisfied, confident; ␣ ⫽ .97) were
created (see also McCrea & Hirt, 2001). Higher scores on the
self-esteem index reflected less (i.e., more negative) self-esteem.
Initial analyses revealed no significant effects of gender, and so
this variable is not discussed further. Univariate and bivariate
statistics for the main variables are presented in Table 2.

Counterfactual Thoughts
Two coders identified any thoughts that indicated how the test
score could have been better or worse. Only those thoughts mentioning a factor that could have affected the outcome of the
psychology exam (and not things affecting other events or the
person’s emotional state) were included. Thus, thoughts expressing satisfaction or disappointment with the outcome were excluded. Those thoughts indicating how the test score could have
been improved above the actual score were coded as upward,
whereas those thoughts indicating how the test score could have
been worse than the actual score were coded as downward. Due to
the open-ended nature of the thought listing instructions, it was not
crucial that the thought followed a strict if–then format but rather
that the thought indicated that the outcome could have been
different. For example, the thought, “The essay is what messed up
my grade because I hadn’t studied that subject thoroughly
enough,” was classified as an upward counterfactual even though
the if–then phrasing was not explicitly given. In addition, the
content of the counterfactual thoughts was classified as concerning
either the amount (or lack) of study effort and preparatory behavior
or other miscellaneous factors. Included in the miscellaneous category were thoughts about interest in and importance of the exam,
the difficulty of the exam, understanding the material, stress or
anxiety, attention and concentration, time allowed for the exam,
etc. For example, the thought “I think I could have done better if
I would have put a little more time studying [sic]” was classified
as a study thought, whereas the thought “Some of the questions I
missed, first I’d circled the right answer and then I doubted myself
so I changed them” was classified as miscellaneous. Interrater
agreement for these judgments was 83% (␬ ⫽ .53), and disagreements were resolved through discussion. Participants generated
relatively few (f ⫽ 18) downward counterfactual thoughts, and so
they were excluded from the analyses.1
1

Including downward thoughts in the analyses either as a separate
variable or by creating an index by subtracting the number of downward
counterfactual thoughts from the number of upward counterfactual
thoughts (see also Markman et al., 1993, 1995) did not alter the results. The
number of downward thoughts predicted increased positive affect, but there
were no other effects of these thoughts.

MCCREA

278

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Table 2
Zero-Order Correlations (Study 1; N ⫽ 125)

Measure

Upward study
thoughts

Upward
miscellaneous
thoughts

Performance

Effort
attribution

Post
self-esteem

Positive
mood

Future study
intentions

Upward study thoughts
Upward miscellaneous thoughts
Performance
Effort attribution
Post self-esteem
Positive mood
Future study intentions
M
SD

––
⫺.10
.02
.16
⫺.17
⫺.03
⫺.27ⴱⴱ
0.22
0.44

––
⫺.19ⴱ
⫺.27ⴱⴱ
.12
⫺.22ⴱ
.15
0.38
0.63

––
.32ⴱⴱⴱ
⫺.62ⴱⴱⴱ
.71ⴱⴱⴱ
⫺.48ⴱⴱⴱ
0.76
0.14

––
⫺.47ⴱⴱⴱ
.40ⴱⴱⴱ
⫺.20ⴱ
4.31
1.85

––
⫺.70ⴱⴱⴱ
.47ⴱⴱⴱ
14.59
9.86

––
⫺.35ⴱⴱⴱ
23.95
13.08

––
0.05
5.42

ⴱ

p ⬍ .05.

ⴱⴱ

p ⬍ .01.

ⴱⴱⴱ

p ⬍ .001.

The number of upward study counterfactual thoughts (f ⫽ 28)
and upward miscellaneous counterfactual thoughts (f ⫽ 47) were
separately regressed on performance on the exam and on the
reported study effort index. Those reporting lower study effort
made more upward counterfactual thoughts than did those reporting higher study effort, ␤ ⫽ ⫺.413, t(119) ⫽ 4.94, p ⬍ .001, f 2 ⫽
.17. There was no effect of performance (t ⬍ 1, ns, f 2 ⫽ .00).
A marginal effect of performance was found on the number of
miscellaneous upward counterfactuals, ␤ ⫽ ⫺.171, t(119) ⫽ 1.92,
p ⬍ .06, f 2 ⫽ .03. Those performing poorly on the exam tended to
make more upward counterfactual thoughts than did those performing well. There was no effect of reported study effort, ␤ ⫽
.141, t(119) ⫽ 1.57, p ⫽ .11, f 2 ⫽ .02.

Effort Attribution
Attributions of performance to effort were regressed on the
following model: reported study intentions, performance on exam,
number of upward study thoughts, number of upward miscellaneous thoughts, and the interaction of these counterfactual variables with performance on the exam. Significant predictors of
effort attributions were performance, ␤ ⫽ .254, t(115) ⫽ 3.11, p ⬍
.01, f 2 ⫽ .08, and the number of miscellaneous counterfactual
thoughts, ␤ ⫽ ⫺.231, t(115) ⫽ 2.73, p ⬍ .01, f 2 ⫽ .06. Participants made more attributions to effort when they performed well
and when they had made fewer upward miscellaneous counterfactuals. In addition, the Performance ⫻ Number of Upward Study
Counterfactuals interaction was significant, ␤ ⫽ ⫺.305, t(115) ⫽
3.79, p ⬍ .001, f 2 ⫽ .11 (see Figure 1). Upward study counterfactual thoughts were associated with increased attributions to
effort for a poor performance (simple-slope ⫽ 2.07), t(121) ⫽
4.16, p ⬍ .001, f 2 ⫽ .12, 95% CI: 1.09 to 3.06, but not for a
successful performance (simple-slope ⫽ ⫺0.69), t(121) ⫽ 1.41,
p ⫽ .16, f 2 ⫽ .02, 95% CI: ⫺1.66 to 0.28.

study thoughts, number of upward miscellaneous thoughts, and the
interaction of these counterfactual variables with performance
were included in a second step.
The analysis predicting positive mood revealed that those scoring better on the exam reported more positive mood, ␤ ⫽ .762,
t(111) ⫽ 9.49, p ⬍ .001, f 2 ⫽ .45. There were no other effects on
this measure (all ts ⬍ 1.67, ps ⬎ .09, f 2 ⬍ .09).
The analysis predicting postexam negative self-esteem revealed
an effect of Rosenberg Self-Esteem scores, ␤ ⫽ ⫺.227, t(111) ⫽
3.21, p ⬍ .01, f 2 ⫽ .09, confirming that this measure was actually
tapping self-esteem. In addition, those scoring worse on the exam
reported more postexam negative self-esteem, ␤ ⫽ ⫺.728,
t(111) ⫽ 8.57, p ⬍ .001, f 2 ⫽ .40. Finally, those generating more
upward counterfactual thoughts about studying reported less postexam negative self-esteem, ␤ ⫽ ⫺.171, t(111) ⫽ 2.48, p ⬍ .05,
f 2 ⫽ .05. There were no other effects on this measure (all ts ⬍
1.67, ps ⬎ .09, f 2 ⬍ .03).
An additional analysis was conducted to examine whether the
effects of upward study thoughts on postexam self-esteem could be
explained by attributions to effort. Therefore, the effort attribution
measure as well as the interaction of this variable with performance was added to the model in a final step. Effort attributions
were indeed a significant predictor of postexam self-esteem, ␤ ⫽
⫺.333, t(109) ⫽ 4.45, p ⬍ .001, f 2 ⫽ .15. Individuals reported less
negative postexam self-esteem when they attributed their perfor-

Postexam Mood and Self-Esteem
The positive mood and negative self-esteem indices were regressed onto the following model: Rosenberg Self-Esteem scores
(␣ ⫽ .90, M ⫽ 53.47, SD ⫽ 10.83), GPA (M ⫽ 3.26, SD ⫽ 0.44),
and standardized test scores (M ⫽ 6.03, SD ⫽ 1.68) were included
in an initial step. Performance on the exam, number of upward

Figure 1. Effect of the Performance ⫻ Number of Upward Study
Thoughts interaction on effort attributions (Study 1).

SELF-HANDICAPPING AND EXCUSING COUNTERFACTUALS

mance to effort. More importantly, the upward study counterfactual effect remained significant, ␤ ⫽ ⫺.140, t(109) ⫽ 2.09, p ⬍
.05, f 2 ⫽ .04. Thus, the effects of these thoughts were not explained by effort attributions.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Future Study Intentions
The future study intention index was regressed onto the following model: Reported study effort, Rosenberg Self-Esteem scores,
GPA, standardized test scores, and performance on the exam were
included in an initial step. Number of upward study thoughts,
number of upward miscellaneous thoughts, negative postexam
self-esteem, and the interactions of the counterfactual variables
with negative postexam self-esteem were added in a second step.
The analysis predicting future study intentions revealed effects of
reported study effort, ␤ ⫽ .633, t(101) ⫽ 9.94, p ⬍ .001, f 2 ⫽ .49,
and performance, ␤ ⫽ ⫺.230, t(101) ⫽ 2.49, p ⬍ .05, f 2 ⫽ .06,
indicating that those who reported higher study effort and scored
worse on the exam reported higher intentions to study in the future.
In addition, there was an effect of negative postexam self-esteem,
␤ ⫽ .251, t(101) ⫽ 2.97, p ⬍ .01, f 2 ⫽ .08, such that those
reporting more negative postexam self-esteem intended to study
more. Finally, the interaction of number of upward study thoughts
and negative self-esteem was significant, ␤ ⫽ .231, t(101) ⫽ 3.66,
p ⬍ .001, f 2 ⫽ .12 (see Figure 2). Simple-slopes tests were
conducted controlling for reported study effort, Rosenberg SelfEsteem scores, performance on the exam, SAT scores, and GPA.
These analyses revealed that, among those experiencing more
negative postexam self-esteem, the effect of number of upward
study thoughts was positive and significant (simple-slope ⫽ 4.73),
t(103) ⫽ 3.31, p ⬍ .01, f 2 ⫽ .09, 95% CI: 1.89 to 7.56. Thus, these
individuals demonstrated higher future study intentions after generating more upward study counterfactuals. Among those experiencing less negative self-esteem, the effect of number of upward
study thoughts was negative and significant (simple-slope ⫽
⫺2.24), t(103) ⫽ 2.16, p ⬍ .05, f 2 ⫽ .04, 95% CI: ⫺4.30 to
⫺0.19. Thus, these individuals showed the reverse effect, namely,
lower future study intentions after generating more upward study
counterfactuals. There were no other effects on this measure (all
ts ⬍ 1.44, ps ⬎ .15, f 2 ⫽ .02).

279

An additional analysis was conducted to examine whether the
effects of upward study thoughts on future study intentions could
be explained by attributions to effort. Therefore, the effort attribution measure as well as the interaction of this variable with
negative postexam self-esteem was added to the model in a final
step. Neither the effort attribution term nor the interaction of effort
attributions with negative postexam self-esteem was significant
(ts ⬍ 1.39, ps ⬎ .16, f 2 ⬍ .02). The interaction of upward study
counterfactual thoughts and negative postexam self-esteem also
remained significant, ␤ ⫽ .160, t(99) ⫽ 2.25, p ⬍ .05, f 2 ⫽ .06.

Discussion
As predicted, a reported lack of study effort increased upward
counterfactual thinking about studying. This finding is consistent
with past counterfactual research that has shown that individuals
are likely to mutate exceptional or abnormal conditions, particularly after a negative outcome (Kahneman & Miller, 1986; Wells
& Gavanski, 1989), as well as with the predictions of S. J.
Sherman and McConnell (1995) that self-handicapping should
increase upward counterfactual thinking. Rather than leading to
affective contrast effects, upward counterfactual thoughts identifying an unstable factor in the form of a self-handicap excused
poor performance and therefore protected self-esteem (see also
Covington & Omelich, 1979; Weiner, 1985).
The second purpose of the study was to examine the consequences of excusing upward counterfactuals for future motivation.
Consistent with past research that has shown that upward counterfactuals improve subsequent motivation only when accompanied by negative affect (Markman et al., 2008; Myers & McCrea,
2008), upward study counterfactual thoughts were associated with
higher intentions to study in the future when individuals experienced negative self-esteem as a result of a poor performance.
However, as predicted, the reverse effect held for those experiencing less negative self-esteem. Among these individuals, upward
study counterfactual thoughts were associated with lower study
intentions. In other words, it appears that the preparative effect of
upward counterfactual thinking can be undermined or even reversed when these thoughts can serve to excuse a poor performance.
It is also important to note that the effects of upward study
counterfactuals were independent of attributions to effort. Thus,
although the present findings reveal the usefulness of applying
models of attribution (e.g., Weiner, 1985) to counterfactual thinking, they also replicate past research that has shown that causal
attribution and counterfactual thinking are independent processes
(Mandel, 2003; Mandel & Lehman, 1996).

Study 2––Manipulating the Availability of a SelfHandicap

Figure 2. Effect of the Number of Upward Study Thoughts ⫻ Negative
Self-Esteem interaction on future study intentions (Study 1).

Study 2 was designed to replicate the finding that the availability of a self-handicap increases the generation of upward counterfactuals identifying the handicap following failure and that the
generation of these thoughts serves to protect self-esteem. To
provide a stronger test of these hypotheses, I experimentally manipulated the presence of a handicap. Consistent with past work
examining the reduction of task effort as a self-handicap, participants were told that they would be taking a test of intelligence but

MCCREA

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

280

that the test was not valid unless one spent 10 min on a practice
exam (see also Hirt et al., 1991, 2000). The presence of a handicap
was varied by inducing individuals to practice for 10 min or to not
practice at all (see also Brown & Josephs, 1999; Rhodewalt et al.,
1991). A modified induced compliance procedure (cf. Festinger &
Carlsmith, 1959; Smith, 1961) was utilized so that participants felt
that their behavior had been freely chosen and that counterfactuals
generated about the handicap would identify a controllable behavior. This procedure was important in order to ensure that participants would view the handicap as mutable and that individuals
could at least theoretically regret their lack of effort. All participants then completed the actual exam and were given failure
feedback. It was predicted that the presence of a handicap (i.e.,
lack of adequate practice effort) would result in an increase in
upward counterfactual thinking, specifically about the handicap
itself. The lack of adequate practice should provide a salient reason
for poor performance. Furthermore, generating relatively more
upward counterfactual thoughts about practice was not expected to
predict lower self-esteem in the no-practice (handicap present)
condition. In this condition, upward counterfactual thoughts identifying lack of effort should serve as an excuse for failure. Because
this excuse was not present in the practice (handicap absent)
condition, a negative relationship between upward counterfactual
thinking about practice and self-esteem was expected in this condition. As in Study 1, no specific predictions were made for
thoughts unrelated to the handicap.

Method
Participants
Participants were 125 (64 men and 61 women) Indiana University students in an introductory psychology course. They took part
in partial fulfillment of a course requirement. Participants were
randomly assigned to one of the two practice conditions.

Materials and Procedure
Upon entering the lab, participants completed a detailed informed consent statement and were then asked to complete the
Rosenberg (1965) Self-Esteem scale while the main experiment
was being prepared. They were told that this measure was part of
a questionnaire for a colleague at another university. Collected
questionnaires were placed in an envelope addressed to this researcher. They were then told that the main experiment would
involve taking a nonverbal test of intelligence called the CultureFair Intelligence Test (Cattell & Cattell, 1961). They were shown
four example items, taken from the conditions subtest of the
Culture-Fair Intelligence Test. The experimenter led the participants through the first two examples to ensure participants understood the instructions. Participants completed the third and fourth
examples on their own. They were told they were correct on the
third example and incorrect on the fourth to increase their uncertainty about the exam and make self-handicapping more desirable
(cf. Berglas & Jones, 1978; Hirt et al., 2000; Thompson, 2004).
All participants were told that prior research had indicated that
practice ensures that the Culture-Fair Intelligence Test is accurate
but that lack of adequate practice can result in a score that is lower
than warranted by the person’s actual intelligence (cf. Hirt et al.,

1991, 2000). Participants were also told that the researchers were
interested in examining the effect of practice on the exam, and so
they were asking participants to either complete a set amount of
practice problems or to not practice at all. Participants were then
randomly assigned to one of two practice conditions.
In the practice condition, participants were told that a computer
error had resulted in the experimenter’s running too many people
in the no-practice condition, and so the participants were asked if
they would not mind being in the practice condition (see also
Brown & Josephs, 1999). Once participants had agreed to practice,
they were asked again and told that it was their choice to make, in
order to reinforce the notion that the choice to practice was their
own (cf. Festinger & Carlsmith, 1959; Smith, 1961).
In the no-practice condition, participants were told that a computer error had resulted in the experimenter’s running too many
people in the practice condition, and so they were asked if they
would not mind being in the no-practice condition. The same
procedure to reinforce the notion of free choice was used. In this
manner, participants were provided with a viable excuse for any
subsequent poor performance.
Immediately following these instructions, participants were
asked to what extent they understood the instructions and felt
pressured to practice or not practice, responding on a 1 (not at all)
to 5 (very much) scale. Following these questions, participants in
the practice condition began the practice exam, entering their
answers into the computer. They completed 10 practice items
without a time limit. Participants in the no-practice condition did
not receive any practice items. All participants then began the
actual exam, entering their answers into the computer. Following
the exam, all participants received failure feedback indicating that
they had correctly answered 6 out of 20 problems, placing them in
the bottom 35% of college students. After reading their feedback,
they were given instructions concerning the generation of counterfactual thoughts. These instructions, adapted from Roese and
Olson (1995c), were as follows:
We are interested in individual differences and how they relate to
performance on the nonverbal test. One such difference is the thoughts
people have about a test. For example, people often have thoughts like
“If only. . .” or “At least. . .” when thinking about a past performance.
People often think about the things that could have happened right
before or during such a test, including things they might have done
themselves, that could have changed their score on the test.
We would like you to write the thoughts of this type you are having
right now about the nonverbal test you just took. For example, you
could think, “If only I had ______, I would have done better on the
nonverbal test.” Alternatively, you could be thinking, “At least
______ happened, or I might have done worse on the nonverbal test.”

Participants were reminded to write thoughts identifying how their
performance on the test could have been different. They were then
given 5 min to list up to 15 counterfactual thoughts, entering them
into the computer.
Participants then completed a state self-esteem and mood measure, as in Study 1. Additional positive self-esteem items were
included in order to have a more balanced measure. Participants
indicated the extent to which they felt each of the items at that
moment, using a 1 (not at all) to 5 (very much) scale.
Participants next indicated to what extent they attributed their
performance to their practice effort on a 1 (not at all) to 5 (very

SELF-HANDICAPPING AND EXCUSING COUNTERFACTUALS

281

Table 3
Zero-Order Correlations (Study 2; N ⫽ 125)
Measure

Upward practice thoughts

Upward miscellaneous thoughts

Effort attributions

Post self-esteem

Upward practice thoughts
Upward miscellaneous thoughts
Effort attributions
Post self-esteem
M
SD

––
⫺.05
.29ⴱⴱ
⫺.03
0.60
0.86

––
⫺.14
⫺.13
2.42
1.97

––
⫺.05
3.07
1.36

––
29.73
6.61

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

ⴱⴱ

p ⬍ .01.

much) scale and completed a final manipulation check item concerning to what extent the experimenter had told them that practice
is helpful for the nonverbal exam, responding on a 1 (not at all) to
5 (very much) scale. They were then completely debriefed regarding the purpose of the study and need for deception. Specifically,
they were told that the feedback they had received was the same
for all participants and therefore should not be considered indicative of their actual intelligence.

Results
Overview
Initial analyses revealed no gender differences, and so this
variable is not considered further. On the basis of correlational and
reliability analyses, a nine-item (i.e., shame [reversed], worthless
[reversed], incompetent [reversed], inadequate [reversed], smart,
effective, resourceful, proud, competent) index of postperformance
state self-esteem was created (␣ ⫽ .84).2 Correlations between the
main measures are provided in Table 3. As in Study 1, predictor
variables were mean-centered for regression analyses, and simpleslope tests and plotting of predicted scores were conducted at ⫾1
standard deviation from the mean for significant interactions
(Aiken & West, 1991).

Manipulation Checks
There were no differences between conditions on any of the
manipulation checks (ts ⬍ 1.54, ps ⬎ .12, ␩2 ⬍ .02). Individuals
reported feeling only somewhat pressured to make the decision to
practice or not (M ⫽ 3.02, SD ⫽ 0.92). Furthermore, participants
reported understanding the instructions (M ⫽ 3.62, SD ⫽ 1.58) and
correctly recalled that practice had been described as helpful for
the exam (M ⫽ 3.18, SD ⫽ 1.22).

Counterfactual Thoughts
Two independent coders identified and classified the counterfactual thoughts by direction (upward or downward) and content
(practice or miscellaneous), as in Study 1. For example, the
thoughts “If I had had more time to prepare, I might have performed better” and “Maybe practice would have helped” were
classified as upward practice thoughts, whereas the thoughts “If I
had a better understanding of what the test was asking of me, I
would have done better” and “I could have done better on the test
if I had concentrated more” were classified as upward miscellaneous thoughts. Interrater agreement was 90% (␬ ⫽ .79), and

disagreements were resolved through discussion. The analyses
again centered on the number of upward counterfactual thoughts
within the practice (f ⫽ 75) and miscellaneous (f ⫽ 302) content
categories.3 Single-factor (practice condition) analyses of covariance, controlling for Rosenberg Self-Esteem (␣ ⫽ .93; M ⫽ 53.73,
SD ⫽ 12.52) as a covariate, were conducted on the number of
practice and upward miscellaneous counterfactual thoughts.
For the number of upward practice thoughts, the effect of
practice condition was significant, F(1, 121) ⫽ 42.76, p ⬍ .001,
␩2 ⫽ .26. As predicted, relatively more upward thoughts about
practice were generated in the no-practice condition (M ⫽ 1.07)
than in the practice condition (M ⫽ 0.17). There were no significant effects of practice condition on upward miscellaneous
thoughts, F(1, 121) ⫽ 1.59, p ⫽ .21, ␩2 ⫽ .01. There were no
effects of Rosenberg Self-Esteem on either thought category (Fs ⬍
1.12, ns, ␩2 ⬍ .01).

Attribution to Effort
The postperformance self-esteem index was regressed onto the
following model: Rosenberg Self-Esteem scores, practice condition (dummy coding: 1 ⫽ practice condition, 0 ⫽ no-practice
condition), number of upward practice thoughts, number of upward miscellaneous thoughts, and the interactions of these two
counterfactual thought categories with practice condition.
Although the zero-order correlation between upward practice
counterfactuals and effort attributions was positive and significant,
2

In addition, indices of worry (i.e., scared, nervous, afraid, fearful,
panic, and worried; ␣ ⫽ .85), disappointment (i.e., disappointed, discouraged, upset, pessimistic, irritable, and insecure; ␣ ⫽ .83) and positive mood
(i.e., enthusiastic, inspired, delighted, hopeful, pleased, optimistic, active,
excited, determined, satisfied, interested; ␣ ⫽ .92) were created. Regressing the worry index onto the same regression model as the one used to
assess effects on postexam self-esteem revealed effects of Rosenberg
Self-Esteem scores, ␤ ⫽ ⫺.243, t(115) ⫽ 2.63, p ⬍ .05, f 2 ⫽ .06, but no
other effects (ts ⬍ 1.36, ps ⬎ .17, f 2 ⬍ .02). The practice-condition effect
approached significance on the positive mood index, ␤ ⫽ ⫺.241, t(115) ⫽
1.98, p ⫽ .05, f 2 ⫽ .03, indicating that individuals reported more positive
affect in the no-practice condition. There were no other significant effects
on positive mood (ts ⬍ 1.48, ps ⬎ .14, f 2 ⬍ .02). Finally, there were no
effects on the disappointment index (ts ⬍ 1.67, ps ⬎ .09, f 2 ⬍ .03).
3
As in Study 1, including downward thoughts in the analyses either as
a separate variable or by creating an overall index of the direction of
counterfactuals did not alter the results presented here. Higher numbers of
miscellaneous downward thoughts predicted decreased worry and disappointment, but there were no other effects of downward thoughts.

282

MCCREA

only the practice-condition term predicted effort attributions in this
regression model, ␤ ⫽ ⫺.424, t(115) ⫽ 3.83, p ⬍ .001, f 2 ⫽ .11.
Participants made more attributions to effort in the no-practice
condition than they did in the practice condition. There were no
other significant effects (ts ⬍ 1.81, ps ⬎ .07, f 2 ⬍ .03).

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Postperformance Self-Esteem
The postperformance self-esteem index was regressed onto the
following model: Rosenberg Self-Esteem scores, practice condition (dummy coding: 1 ⫽ practice condition, 0 ⫽ no-practice
condition), number of upward practice thoughts, number of upward miscellaneous thoughts, and the interactions of these two
counterfactual thought categories with practice condition. Over
and above the effect of Rosenberg Self-Esteem scores, ␤ ⫽ .151,
t(115) ⫽ 1.64, p ⫽ .10, f 2 ⫽ .03, the Practice ⫻ Number of
Upward Practice Thoughts interaction was significant, ␤ ⫽ ⫺.297,
t(115) ⫽ 2.36, p ⬍ .05, f 2 ⫽ .05 (see Figure 3). Simple-slope tests
conducted while controlling for Rosenberg Self-Esteem scores
revealed a significant effect of upward practice thoughts in the
practice condition (simple-slope ⫽ ⫺5.38), t(117) ⫽ 2.53, p ⬍
.05, f 2 ⫽ .05, 95% CI: ⫺9.58 to ⫺1.17, but not in the no-practice
condition (simple-slope ⫽ 0.59, t ⬍ 1, ns, f 2 ⫽ .00, 95% CI:
⫺1.09 to 2.27). Thus, generating more upward thoughts about
practice predicted lower self-esteem only in the practice condition.
There were no effects of the miscellaneous counterfactual thoughts
(ts ⬍ 1, ns, f 2 ⫽ .00).
An additional analysis was conducted to examine whether the
effects of upward practice thoughts on postexam self-esteem could
be explained by attributions to effort. Therefore, the effortattribution measure as well as the interaction of this variable with
practice condition was added to the model. The Practice ⫻ Effort
Attribution term was indeed a significant predictor of postexam
self-esteem, ␤ ⫽ ⫺.310, t(113) ⫽ 2.23, p ⬍ .05, f 2 ⫽ .04,
indicating that individuals reported less positive postexam selfesteem in the practice condition (but not in the no-practice condition) when they attributed their performance to effort. More importantly, however, the Practice ⫻ Number of Upward Practice

Figure 3. Effect of the Number of Upward Practice Thoughts ⫻ Practice
Condition interaction on postperformance self-esteem (Study 2).

Thoughts interaction remained significant, ␤ ⫽ ⫺.295, t(113) ⫽
2.38, p ⬍ .05, f 2 ⫽ .05.

Discussion
The presence of a handicap in the form of insufficient practice
resulted in increased upward counterfactual thinking about the
handicap. Furthermore, higher numbers of upward practice
thoughts predicted more negative self-esteem in the practice condition, consistent with past work showing affective contrast effects
of upward counterfactual thinking (Boninger et al., 1994; Markman et al., 1993; Roese, 1994). However, the number of upward
practice thoughts was unrelated to postexam self-esteem in the
no-practice condition. Thus, upward counterfactual thoughts identifying an existing handicap predicted maintained self-esteem.
These findings are consistent with models of attribution (e.g.,
Weiner, 1985) predicting that attributing a failure to an unstable
cause protects self-esteem. However, replicating Study 1, the effects of counterfactual thoughts were not accounted for by attributions to effort, suggesting counterfactuals are independent of
attribution processes (see also Mandel, 2003; Mandel & Lehman,
1996).

Study 3––Manipulating Counterfactual Direction
Studies 1 and 2 demonstrated that upward counterfactual
thoughts pointing to an available self-handicap predicted maintained self-esteem after a failure. Furthermore, excusing upward
counterfactuals predicted reduced future study intentions. However, due to the correlational nature of these findings, the causal
effect of these thoughts on self-esteem and subsequent motivation
is still unclear. Furthermore, these studies did not allow comparison to a control condition in which participants did not consider
counterfactuals. To provide stronger evidence for the claim that
upward counterfactual thoughts protect self-esteem when pointing
to a self-handicap, the direction of counterfactual thinking was
manipulated in Study 3. Specifically, participants were induced to
practice inadequately for an exam and subsequently told that they
had failed, as in Study 2. They were then exposed to downward
counterfactuals, upward counterfactuals, or were assigned to a
no-counterfactual control condition, and completed a state selfesteem measure. It was predicted that, in the presence of a handicap, individuals would report more positive self-esteem after
considering upward counterfactuals pointing to the handicap as
having prevented better performance, relative to those in the control condition, and no different or perhaps more positive than those
considering downward counterfactuals.
A second purpose of the study was to replicate the finding from
Study 1 that upward counterfactuals predict lower subsequent
preparation intentions when accompanied by more positive selfesteem. To provide stronger evidence for these effects on subsequent motivation to improve, participants in the present study were
given a surprise opportunity to practice for a second version of the
exam. The number of items attempted and the time spent practicing were recorded to provide a behavioral measure of subsequent
preparation. It was predicted that individuals would practice less in
the upward counterfactual condition than they would in the control
and downward counterfactual conditions, as these thoughts would

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

SELF-HANDICAPPING AND EXCUSING COUNTERFACTUALS

serve to excuse the poor performance by identifying the selfhandicap as having prevented a better score.
The surprise nature of the subsequent exam was important. A
potential drawback of the design of Study 1 was that participants
knew that they would have the opportunity to take a similar test
again in the future. Outcomes that can be changed in the future
more often lead to affective assimilation for counterfactual thinking (Boninger et al., 1994; McMullen & Markman, 2002). An
alternative explanation for the self-esteem findings in Study 1 then
could be that individuals generating more upward counterfactual
thoughts felt relieved because they knew they could study more in
the future and improve their performance. Of course, this contradicts the finding that these same individuals intended to study less
in the future. Nonetheless, it is important to rule out this possible
explanation by demonstrating that participants would show the
same effects for self-esteem and preparatory behavior when they
were initially unaware that a second performance opportunity
would arise.
Study 3 sought to demonstrate these effects with a different type
of academic performance, specifically a mathematics test. Furthermore, the evaluative threat of the performance was increased by
placing participants under conditions of public self-focus via a
closed-circuit camera. Previous research has shown that such conditions increase the likelihood of self-handicapping behavior (Hirt
et al., 2000).

Method
Participants and Design
Participants were 73 (39 women, 34 men) University of Konstanz students, recruited in return for research credit or €5 payment. Seven participants were excluded for reporting suspicion
about the purpose of the study or the negative feedback, leaving 66
(34 women, 32 men) participants in the study. They were randomly assigned to one of three counterfactual conditions (upward
counterfactual, downward counterfactual, or no-counterfactual
control).

Materials and Procedure
Participants first completed the Rosenberg Self-Esteem scale as
part of a prescreening questionnaire prior to participation in the
experiment using a scale from 0 (not at all) to 5 (very much).
Participants were told this questionnaire was required for all those
participating in studies in the Social and Motivational Psychology
department. Questionnaires were identified only by a unique code.
Participants arrived individually at the laboratory and were told
the experiment dealt with performance on a mathematics test. They
were told that prior research had shown that individuals respond
more honestly when they are observed, and that for this reason,
they would be observed via a video camera connection to the
experimenter’s computer monitor (cf. Hirt et al., 2000). Participants were shown that the camera and the video display were on
and working and then completed a consent statement agreeing to
be involved in the study.
The test was described as measuring not only math ability but
also the ability to solve problems logically. Participants were told
the experimenters were interested in individual differences in

283

performance on this test, and so they would also be completing
personality measures. They were then told that one disadvantage of
the math test was that it was not predictive of actual ability if test
takers had not completed a short practice test in order to “warmup” (cf. Hirt et al., 1991, 2000). They were told that this effect was
being further evaluated and that therefore they would be assigned
to practice either the entire recommended 10-min period or only a
2-min period. These instructions were repeated through a test of
understanding to ensure that participants had paid attention. As in
Study 2, the experimenter explained that a previous programming
error had resulted in assigning everyone to the practice condition,
and therefore there were not enough people who had insufficiently
practiced. The experimenter asked all participants to be in the
low-practice condition, and this choice was reinforced through
additional questioning.
Participants then completed the 2-min practice session and
began the actual 20-item exam. The exam was adapted from the
mathematics section of the I-S-T 2000R (Amthauer, Brocke, Liepmann, & Beauducel, 2001). After the completion of the exam,
participants were informed that they had answered 11 out of 20
correct, placing them in the 35th percentile of university students.
Participants were then told that they would read 10 statements
made by previous participants about their performance on the
exam. They were asked to carefully read the statements and relate
them to their own performance on the math test. They were then
randomly assigned to read one of three different sets of statements.
In the upward counterfactual condition, participants read 5 counterfactual statements indicating that a greater amount of practice
would have improved their performance (e.g., “If I had practiced
more, I would have done better”) and 5 neutral statements (e.g.,
“The test was interesting”). In the downward counterfactual condition, participants read 5 downward counterfactual statements
indicating that less practice would have undermined their performance (e.g., “If I had practiced less, I would have done worse”)
and the 5 neutral statements. A mix of neutral and counterfactual
statements was utilized in order to reduce suspicion on the part of
participants. In the control condition, participants read 10 neutral
statements. In all conditions, the 10 statements were each presented for 30 s, and the order of the statements was randomized.
Following exposure to the counterfactual statements, participants completed the state self-esteem measure. As in Study 2, they
indicated to what extent they felt each of the items at that moment
using a 1 (not at all) to 7 (very much) scale. After completing this
measure, participants were told that they would be completing a
second version of the math test. There had been no mention of the
second test prior to this point. They were told that in this second
version of the test, speed of response was considered such that it
was important to be fast as well as correct. They were told that the
second version of the test was also influenced by practice but that
because of the speed component, the amount of practice they had
on the previous version had no real effect on this second version.
Therefore, they were told it was important to again practice 10 min
in order to make the scores of the test a true measure of their
mathematical ability. Participants could decide how much or how
little they practiced for the test. After each answered item, participants could decide whether to continue or quit the practice session. Practice time and the number of items completed were
recorded.

MCCREA

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

284

Finally, participants were told they had been assigned to a
control condition in which it was not necessary to complete the
second math test. They were next asked to answer several questions concerning the test. First, they were asked to recall the
instructions they were given concerning the effects of practice.
They indicated whether the experimenter had said that practice
affected the test on a 1 (no effect) to 5 (strong effect) scale. They
were also asked whether they believed practice affects the test
using the same scale. Next, participants were asked how important
it was for them to perform well on the test using a 1 (not at all) to
5 (very important) scale and whether the test was valid using a 1
(not at all) to 5 (very valid) scale. They were then fully debriefed
(including being told the feedback was the same for all participants) and were given the opportunity to see their actual exam
performance.

Results
Overview
To eliminate skewness in the practice measures, practice time
(M ⫽ 225.70 s, SD ⫽ 220.19) and number of questions completed
(M ⫽ 7.65, SD ⫽ 6.97) were square-root-transformed. The two
measures were highly correlated (r ⫽ .91). Consistent with past
work (see Hirt et al., 1991, 2000), these measures were standardized and summed (␣ ⫽ .95). The nine postperformance self-esteem
items (worthless [reversed], inadequate [reversed], shame [reversed], dumb [reversed], unable [reversed], proud, competence,
resourceful, capable) were also combined into a single measure
(␣ ⫽ .70). Initial analyses revealed no significant effects of gender,
and so this variable was dropped from further consideration. Analyses on postperformance self-esteem and practice effort were
conducted after controlling for Rosenberg Self-Esteem scores
(␣ ⫽ .85, M ⫽ 37.67, SD ⫽ 7.87) as well as perceived importance
and validity of the exam.

Manipulation Checks
There were no significant effects on any of the manipulation
checks (all Fs ⬍ 2.07, ps ⬎ .13, ␩2 ⬍ .07). Participants correctly
recalled the practice instructions (M ⫽ 4.70, SD ⫽ 0.78), believed
that amount of practice had an effect on performance on the test
(M ⫽ 4.03, SD ⫽ 1.04), reported that it was somewhat important
for them to do well on the exam (M ⫽ 2.86, SD ⫽ 1.25), and that
the exam was a valid measure of math ability (M ⫽ 3.29, SD ⫽
1.16).

Postperformance Self-Esteem
Regressing the postperformance self-esteem index on Rosenberg Self-Esteem scores and perceived importance and validity of
the exam revealed an effect of Rosenberg Self-Esteem, ␤ ⫽ .398,
t(62) ⫽ 3.41, p ⬍ .01, f 2 ⫽ .16. There were no effects of perceived
importance or validity of the exam (ts ⬍ 1, ns, f 2 ⫽ .00). Planned
comparisons were then conducted on the postperformance selfesteem residual scores (see Table 4). As predicted, those in the
upward counterfactual condition reported more positive selfesteem than did those in the control condition, t(63) ⫽ 2.49, p ⬍
.05, ␩2 ⫽ .09. The difference between the upward and downward

Table 4
Study 3 Results
Measure
Post self-esteem (raw scores)
M
SD
Post self-esteem (residual scores)
M
SD
Practice index (raw scores)
M
SD
Practice index (residual scores)
M
SD

Upward
(n ⫽ 24)

Downward
(n ⫽ 20)

Control
(n ⫽ 22)

34.96
3.14

34.30
3.59

32.23
5.40

1.32
2.90

0.26
2.87

⫺1.46
5.10

⫺0.54
2.02

0.65
1.77

0.04
1.90

⫺0.66
1.93

0.74
1.73

0.05
1.75

counterfactual conditions was not significant, t(63) ⫽ 1.13, p ⫽
.26, ␩2 ⫽ .02.

Subsequent Preparation
Regressing the practice index on Rosenberg Self-Esteem scores
and perceived importance and validity of the exam revealed only
a nonsignificant effect of importance of the exam, ␤ ⫽ .240,
t(62) ⫽ 1.91, p ⫽ .06, f 2 ⫽ .06. There were no other effects (ts ⬍
1, ns, f 2 ⬍ .02). Planned comparisons were conducted on the
practice index residual scores (see Table 4). Those in the upward
counterfactual condition practiced significantly less than did those
in the downward counterfactual condition, t(63) ⫽ 2.56, p ⬍ .05,
␩2 ⫽ .09.4 The difference between the upward counterfactual and
control conditions was not significant, t(63) ⫽ 1.33, p ⫽ .19, ␩2 ⫽
.03.

Discussion
Replicating the prior studies, exposure to upward counterfactual
thoughts pointing to a self-handicap mitigated the negative impact
of a failure on self-esteem relative to exposure to a set of neutral
thoughts. Downward counterfactuals also appeared to have a positive impact on self-esteem, albeit somewhat weaker than the
upward counterfactuals had. Study 3 extended the prior studies by
4
Given that the second exam was said to assess speed as well as
correctness, it could be that reduced practice in the upward counterfactual
thought condition was due to increased speed of practice in this condition.
Planned comparisons were therefore conducted on the speed of practice
(those not practicing at all were considered missing), after controlling for
Rosenberg Self-Esteem scores and perceived importance and validity of
the exam. There was a significant effect of test importance, ␤ ⫽ ⫺.313,
t(56) ⫽ 2.38, p ⬍ .05, f2 ⫽ .09, such that those perceiving the test as more
important practiced more slowly. There were no effects of Rosenberg
Self-Esteem or test validity on speed scores (ts ⬍ 1, ns). More importantly,
there were no differences between conditions for either the unstandardized
residual scores or the raw speed scores (all ts ⬍ 1.68, ps ⬎ .09). Indeed,
practice speed was actually nonsignificantly slower in the upward counterfactual condition (M ⫽ 2.76 items per minute) compared to the control
condition (M ⫽ 4.09 items per minute). Thus, reduced practice effort in the
upward counterfactual condition was not due to differences in speed of
practice.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

SELF-HANDICAPPING AND EXCUSING COUNTERFACTUALS

demonstrating the causal effects of counterfactual content on subsequent self-esteem. It is also important to note that these effects
occurred despite participants not being aware that they would be
able to repeat the performance. Previous research has shown that
upward counterfactuals result in less negative affect when the
event is repeatable (Boninger et al., 1994; McMullen & Markman,
2002). Because participants were initially unaware of the opportunity to practice for an additional exam, the more positive selfesteem reported by participants in the upward counterfactual condition is unlikely to be due to participants feeling more prepared.
This interpretation is also reinforced by the finding that the
preparative function of upward counterfactual thinking was eliminated when these thoughts could serve as an excuse. Rather than
demonstrating increased motivation to practice, individuals practiced significantly less for the second exam after exposure to the
upward counterfactual thoughts than they did after exposure to
downward counterfactuals. Indeed, examining the practice measures more closely reveals that 5 participants in the upward counterfactual condition failed to practice a single item, whereas only
1 participant in the downward and control conditions combined
failed to practice. Thus, the effects on future study intentions
observed in Study 1 were replicated using an experimental manipulation of counterfactual direction and measuring actual practice
behavior. The benefits of counterfactual thinking for preparation
and motivation appear to be dependent on whether the thought
serves a self-protective or mood-maintaining function for the individual rather than on the direction (upward or downward) of the
thought. When upward counterfactual thoughts do not result in
dissatisfaction with the performance, they no longer have positive
benefits for future motivation (see also Markman & McMullen,
2003; Myers & McCrea, 2008).

Study 4 ––Manipulating Counterfactual Content
The consequences of upward counterfactuals identifying a selfhandicap for self-esteem and subsequent motivation have thus far
been explained with reference to classic models of attribution
(Covington & Omelich, 1979; Weiner, 1985), as well as past
findings in the self-handicapping literature (McCrea & Hirt, 2001;
Rhodewalt et al., 1991) that have proposed that attributing a poor
performance to an unstable cause (such as a self-handicap) serves
to protect self-esteem. To test this explanation more directly, in
Study 4, I manipulated whether participants were exposed to
upward counterfactuals suggesting that either a self-handicap (i.e.,
an unstable factor) or a lack of ability (i.e., a stable factor) was to
blame for a poor math performance. A second goal of the present
study was to replicate the previous findings with a different type of
self-handicap. Rather than practicing insufficiently, participants
were induced to listen to distracting noises while completing the
math test (Rhodewalt et al., 1991; Shepperd & Arkin, 1989b). It
was expected that upward counterfactual thinking would protect
self-esteem only when the thoughts pointed to noise as having
prevented a better score on the math test.
Furthermore, it was predicted that motivation to improve on a
subsequent test would be lower when poor performance was
excused by upward counterfactuals. To test this notion, participants were asked to select the level of distraction they would
experience during a surprise second version of the math test. It was
expected that individuals exposed to upward counterfactual

285

thoughts suggesting that the noise was to blame for their poor
performance would be more likely to listen to distracting noise
during the second math test than would those exposed to counterfactual thoughts suggesting that their own lack of ability was to
blame. Based on pretesting and past findings demonstrating that
men are more likely than women to self-handicap by placing
themselves in distracting environments (Rhodewalt, 1990; Rhodewalt et al., 1991; Shepperd & Arkin, 1989b), only men participated
in the present study.

Method
Participants and Design
Participants were 40 male University of Konstanz students. Four
participants expressed suspicion of the procedure and were therefore excluded. Two additional participants were excluded due to an
equipment malfunction causing the distracting noise not to play
properly. The remaining 34 participants were randomly assigned to
one of three (handicap, ability, or control) counterfactual conditions.

Procedure
Participants again completed the Rosenberg Self-Esteem scale
as part of a prescreening measure prior to the experimental session.
Upon entering the laboratory for the experimental session, participants were told the study dealt with math performance and environmental noise, and they completed a consent form as in prior
studies. They were informed they would be taking a math test and
that performance on this test could be affected by different types of
sounds (see also Rhodewalt et al., 1991; Shepperd & Arkin,
1989b). They were told that the investigators wished to further
examine this finding and that therefore they would be asked to
listen to either performance-enhancing or performance-impairing
noises during the test. As in prior studies, participants were told a
computer error had resulted in too many participants being assigned to listen to the helpful noises. For this reason, they were
asked if they would listen to the distracting music, and this choice
was reinforced. They then were asked to wear a pair of headphones
and complete a 20-item math test (again adapted from Amthauer et
al., 2001) while listening to a sampling of annoying traffic and
construction noises. The noises were presented at a comfortable
listening volume (approximately 45–50 dB), at a level that is rated
as “highly annoying” by less than 5% of individuals and far below
the standard pain threshold of 110 dB (see Algom, Raphaeli, &
Cohen-Raz, 1986; Ouis, 2001, for reviews). The noises were thus
designed to be distracting rather than stressful.
Following the exam, participants received failure feedback and
were assigned to one of the three counterfactual conditions. They
read 10 statements supposedly written by a previous participant.
Those in the handicap condition read 5 thoughts indicating that the
person’s performance could have been improved if (s)he had been
less distracted or had chosen a less impairing noise selection (e.g.,
“If only I had listened to more neutral noises, I would have
achieved a better result”) and 5 neutral statements. Participants in
the ability condition read 5 thoughts indicating that the person’s
performance could have been improved if (s)he was better at math
or had made fewer mistakes (e.g., “My performance would maybe

MCCREA

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

286

have been better if I was better at math”) and 5 neutral statements.
Those in the control condition read 10 neutral statements that did
not indicate how the person’s performance could have been different (e.g., “I am surprised about my score”). Each thought was
presented for 30 s and participants were asked to relate the thought
to their own performance on the math test.
Following the counterfactual manipulation, participants completed the postperformance self-esteem measure, as in prior studies. They were then told that they would be given a chance to
complete a different version of the exam in which speed is factored
into the scoring. As in Study 3, there had been no mention of this
test prior to this point. They were told that for this second version
of the exam, they could choose the level of distraction of the noise
they would hear during the test using a scale from 1 ( performance
hindering) to 7 ( performance facilitating). After this selection was
made, participants were told they had been assigned to a control
condition and would not need to complete the second test. They
completed manipulation checks concerning whether noise could
affect their math performance, as well as the importance and the
validity of the test as in Study 3, and they were then fully debriefed
as in prior studies and given the opportunity to see their actual
exam score.

Results
Overview
As in previous studies, the postperformance self-esteem items
(worthless [reversed], inadequate [reversed], shame [reversed],
dumb [reversed], unable [reversed], proud, competence, resourceful, capable) were combined into a single measure (␣ ⫽ .69).
Analyses on postperformance self-esteem and choice of noise were
conducted after controlling for Rosenberg Self-Esteem scores
(␣ ⫽ .81, M ⫽ 40.03, SD ⫽ 6.85) as well as perceived importance
and validity of the exam.

Manipulation Checks
One-way analyses of variance conducted on each of the manipulation checks revealed no differences between conditions (all
Fs ⬍ 1.33, ps ⬎ .28, ␩2 ⬍ .09). Participants appeared to believe
the test was a reasonably valid measure of math ability (M ⫽ 2.97,
SD ⫽ 1.03) and also felt it was important for them to do well (M ⫽
3.56, SD ⫽ 0.96). Furthermore, they believed that the noises could
affect their performance (M ⫽ 3.82, SD ⫽ 0.90).

Postperformance Self-Esteem
Regressing the postperformance self-esteem index on Rosenberg Self-Esteem scores and perceived importance and validity of
the exam revealed an effect of Rosenberg Self-Esteem, ␤ ⫽ .545,
t(30) ⫽ 3.70, p ⬍ .01, f 2 ⫽ .31. There were no effects of perceived
validity and importance of the exam (ts ⬍ 1.69, ps ⬎ .10, f 2 ⬍
.09). Planned comparisons on the residual scores revealed that
participants reported more positive self-esteem in the handicap
condition than they did in the control condition, t(31) ⫽ 2.10, p ⬍
.05, ␩2 ⫽ .12 (see Table 5). There was also a nonsignificant trend
for participants to report more positive self-esteem in the handicap
than in the ability condition, t(31) ⫽ 1.80, p ⫽ .08, ␩2 ⫽ .09.

Table 5
Study 4 Results
Measure
Post self-esteem (raw scores)
M
SD
Post self-esteem (residual scores)
M
SD
Noise choice (raw scores)
M
SD
Noise choice (residual scores)
M
SD

Handicap
(n ⫽ 12)

Ability
(n ⫽ 12)

Control
(n ⫽ 10)

37.17
3.13

35.33
3.34

34.80
5.39

1.58
2.40

⫺0.63
2.53

⫺1.14
4.07

5.00
2.22

6.33
1.07

5.50
1.43

⫺0.64
1.71

0.62
1.31

0.04
1.08

Choice of Noise
Regressing the choice of noise on Rosenberg Self-Esteem scores
and perceived importance and validity of the exam revealed an
effect of importance of the exam, ␤ ⫽ .512, t(30) ⫽ 2.99, p ⬍ .01,
f 2 ⫽ .23, indicating that those perceiving the test as more important selected more helpful noise. There were no effects of selfesteem scores and perceived validity of the exam (ts ⬍ 1, ns, f 2 ⫽
.00). Planned comparisons on the residual scores revealed that
participants selected less helpful noise in the handicap condition
relative to the ability condition, t(31) ⫽ 2.19, p ⬍ .05, ␩2 ⫽ .13
(see Table 5). There was no difference between the control and
handicap conditions, t(31) ⫽ 1.13, p ⬎ .26, ␩2 ⫽ .04.

Discussion
Replicating the previous studies, upward counterfactual
thoughts identifying an available handicap protected self-esteem
after failure relative to a control condition. In contrast, when
upward counterfactuals identified a lack of ability or mistakes as
having prevented better performance, self-esteem was equivalent
to levels reported in the control condition. These findings thus
directly support the contention that counterfactuals identifying
relatively more unstable factors as having prevented a better outcome serve to protect self-esteem, consistent with past attribution
and self-handicapping research (e.g., Covington & Omelich, 1979;
Feick & Rhodewalt, 1997; McCrea & Hirt, 2001; Rhodewalt et al.,
1991; Weiner, 1985). Furthermore, when upward counterfactuals
identified a handicap, motivation to improve (as measured by the
selection of more helpful noise) was reduced. This latter finding is
particularly noteworthy given that only these thoughts contained
the information that more helpful noise would have improved
performance. Thus, the benefits of counterfactual thinking for
preparation in this study seemed to be driven more by motivational
considerations than by the identification of a useful strategy.

Study 5––Reduced Motivation or Increased SelfHandicapping?
A remaining question concerns the source of the reduced preparative effects observed when upward counterfactuals concern a
self-handicap. Thus far, it has been argued that this effect occurs

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

SELF-HANDICAPPING AND EXCUSING COUNTERFACTUALS

because excusing failure leaves the individual relatively more
satisfied with the performance and thus less motivated to improve
in the future. A growing literature has demonstrated that counterfactuals benefit future performance only when accompanied by
negative affect (Markman & McMullen, 2003; Markman et al.,
2008; McMullen & Markman, 2000; Myers & McCrea, 2008).
However, it is possible that the effects in the present studies are
rather due to an increase in the motivation to self-handicap on the
subsequent task.5 One could argue that counterfactuals mentioning
the self-handicap make this self-protective strategy more cognitively accessible, consistent with past work demonstrating situational priming of goals (Bargh, Gollwitzer, Lee-Chai, Barndollar,
& Troetschel, 2001). Alternatively, because the counterfactual
mentioning the self-handicap excuses poor performance, the individual may continue to positively evaluate his or her ability and
thus is motivated to continue protecting this self-concept by selfhandicapping on subsequent tasks. In contrast, those who have not
excused a poor performance would already suffer from lowered
self-esteem and thus have nothing left to protect. Selfhandicapping is reduced after failure feedback (Berglas & Jones,
1978; Higgins & Harris, 1988; Thompson, 2004) and is generally
construed as an attempt to protect positive yet fragile self-views
(Harris & Snyder, 1986; Jones & Berglas, 1978). Study 5 was
therefore designed to examine whether decreased task motivation
or increased self-handicapping motivation better accounts for the
present effects. Participants were induced to practice insufficiently
and assigned to consider either handicap-related upward counterfactual thoughts or control thoughts, as in Study 3. However, rather
than assessing desire to engage in a behavior that could undermine
performance (e.g., reduced subsequent practice or listening to
distracting noises), participants’ actual effort and performance on
the task was measured. To assess motivation to self-handicap,
participants were told that performance on the second exam was
undermined by high stress levels and that they would therefore be
asked to complete a stress measure. A number of previous studies
have shown that individuals will claim stress as a handicap, and
both men and women are willing to self-handicap in this manner
(Hendrix & Hirt, 2008; Hirt et al., 1991; McCrea & Hirt, 2001).
Thus, if the self-handicapping account is correct, exposure to the
self-handicap-related upward counterfactuals should result in
higher stress reporting but have no effect on task motivation,
compared to control thoughts. In contrast, if the motivation account is correct, there should be no effects of counterfactual
thought on stress reporting, but task effort and performance should
be reduced after exposure to the self-handicap-related upward
counterfactuals.

Method
Participants and Design
Participants were 28 (14 women, 14 men) University of Konstanz students. They either were paid €5 or received credit in return
for participation and were randomly assigned to one of two
thought conditions (handicap vs. control) in a between-subjects
design.

Procedure
The design was adapted from Study 3. The observation of
participants via camera was eliminated given that this manipula-

287

tion proved unnecessary in Study 4. Participants completed the
Rosenberg Self-Esteem inventory as part of a prescreening measure. Upon arrival to the laboratory, they were told the experiment
involved factors influencing math performance and completed a
consent form. After receiving the practice instructions, participants
completed an initial 2-min (insufficient) practice session, the first
math exam, and received failure feedback. Following exposure to
either the handicap-related (i.e., lack of practice) upward counterfactual thoughts or the control thoughts, participants were given
instructions concerning a surprise second math exam. They were
told that the second exam includes a time component and therefore
is strongly affected by one’s current ability to concentrate. Individuals experiencing stress in their lives can become distracted
and, as a result, not perform as well. Participants were therefore
asked to complete a 32-item stress inventory (adapted from Kanner, Coyne, Schaeffer, & Lazarus, 1981). This measure served as
an assessment of self-handicapping (see also Hendrix & Hirt,
2008; Hirt et al., 1991).
Following the stress inventory, participants began the second
math exam. The number of items attempted and the number
correctly answered in a 4-min period were recorded. Participants
then completed manipulation checks as in previous studies.

Results and Discussion
Initial analyses revealed no effects of gender, importance of the
test (M ⫽ 3.78, SD ⫽ 1.05), or perceived validity of the exam
(M ⫽ 3.44, SD ⫽ 0.89), and so these variables are not discussed
further. Participants successfully remembered the instructions that
stress (M ⫽ 4.41, SD ⫽ 1.01) and lack of practice (M ⫽ 4.70,
SD ⫽ 0.72) undermined performance. Given the specific directional hypotheses, one-tailed t-tests were conducted on the dependent measures. Means, standard deviations, and inferential statistics for these analyses are presented in Table 6.

Stress Reporting
Responses to the stress inventory items were summed (␣ ⫽ .87).
There were no significant differences in overall stress scores (see
Table 6). Thus, the self-handicapping account was not supported.

Task Effort and Performance
Participants in the control condition attempted, and correctly
answered, significantly more items in the 4-min period than did
those in the handicap-related counterfactual condition (see Table
6). Furthermore, as a proportion of items attempted, participants in
the control condition outperformed those in the handicap-related
counterfactual condition (see Table 6).
In summary, the results strongly support the conclusion that
considering counterfactuals about a self-handicap reduces motivation to improve on subsequent tasks. There did not appear to be
any evidence that these thoughts increased the desire to selfhandicap. Future researchers should continue to examine this question however. Certainly, it can be argued that reduced concern with
success might increase the attractiveness of self-handicaps (see
also Oleson, Poehlmann, Yost, Lynch, & Arkin, 2000). Further5

I thank Keith Markman for making this suggestion.

MCCREA

288
Table 6
Study 5 Results

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Condition
Handicap (n ⫽ 13)
M
SD
Control (n ⫽ 15)
M
SD
t
p (one-tailed)
␩2

Stress index

Number of
items
attempted

60.23
12.37

8.85
3.91

5.62
3.04

62.1%
18.5%

55.33
12.30
1.05
.15
.04

11.20
2.81
1.85
⬍.05
.11

8.20
2.18
2.61
⬍.01
.21

74.3%
16.0%
1.87
⬍.05
.12

Number
correct

Percent
correct

more, the present studies only examined the consequences of
upward counterfactual thoughts following a failure. Selfhandicapping tends to be increased when one feels uncertain about
a prior success rather than a prior failure (Berglas & Jones, 1978;
Thompson, 2004). The notion that counterfactuals motivate individuals to self-handicap would perhaps find support when these
thoughts have been made after a successful performance, particularly for downward counterfactuals indicating that a worse performance could have been obtained.

General Discussion
The present studies sought to demonstrate that upward counterfactual thoughts can serve to excuse a poor performance (see also
S. J. Sherman & McConnell, 1995). This proposed effect of
counterfactual thinking was examined in the context of selfhandicapping. It was predicted and found that (a) the presence of
a self-handicap increases the availability of upward counterfactual
thoughts, (b) upward counterfactual thoughts indicating that a
self-handicap prevented a better outcome result in more positive
self-esteem following failure, and (c) these same thoughts reduce
motivation to adequately prepare for and do well on an upcoming
performance. Furthermore, evidence for these relationships was
observed in laboratory and field settings, with different types of
academic tests, for both intended and actual behavior, and with
both spontaneously generated and experimentally manipulated
counterfactuals.

Counterfactual Thinking and Self-Protection
Counterfactual thinking has been linked in numerous studies to
causal reasoning (Branscombe et al., 2003; Mandel, 2003; Mandel
& Lehman, 1996; Wells & Gavanski, 1989). Furthermore, past
research has shown that the locus of counterfactual mutation
affects judgments of blame (Branscombe et al., 2003; Creyer &
Guerhan, 1997), regret (Sevdalis & Kokkinaki, 2006), and emotion
(Niedenthal et al., 1994). The present research extends these findings, showing that counterfactual thoughts also influence subsequent self-esteem and that stability of the mutated factor moderates
these effects. Specifically, counterfactuals concerning unstable
causes, such as a lack of effort, protected self-esteem following a
negative performance (see also Covington & Omelich, 1979; McCrea & Hirt, 2001; Rhodewalt et al., 1991; Weiner, 1985). It is
important to note that, although these effects are consistent with

models of attribution, the consequences of counterfactuals for state
self-esteem appeared to be independent of causal attributions,
supporting past work showing that they are related yet independent
processes (Mandel, 2003; Mandel & Lehman, 1996).
The present studies also extend past work showing that although
upward thoughts often result in more negative affect, these effects
can also be reversed. For example, when individuals “reflect” on
counterfactual alternatives, vividly imagining how the outcome
could have been different, they are more likely to experience
positive affect as a result of upward counterfactual thinking (Markman & McMullen, 2003; Markman et al., 2008; McMullen, 1997).
Similarly, the possibility to change an outcome in the future or a
focus on process accountability results in affective assimilation
(Boninger et al., 1994; Markman & Tetlock, 2000a; McMullen &
Markman, 2002). Likewise, upward counterfactuals that can excuse a poor performance (i.e., by identifying an unstable factor as
having prevented a better outcome) seem to lead to more positive
self-esteem.
The ability of upward counterfactuals to excuse failure by
shifting blame to unstable factors adds to a growing literature
demonstrating the role of self-protection concerns in counterfactual thinking. For example, individuals have been shown to use
counterfactual thoughts to deny responsibility for negative outcomes (Markman & Tetlock, 2000b), make negative outcomes
seem better by comparison (Markman et al., 1993), lower future
expectations (Sanna et al., 2001), and suggest that external rather
than internal factors prevented a better outcome for self and
important ingroups (Goerke et al., 2004; McCrea, 2007; Roese &
Olson, 1993).
In addition to stressing the importance of the content of the
counterfactual thought in determining affect and motivation, the
present research also suggests that the same thought can have
differing effects depending on the situational context. For example, the presence of a self-handicap in Study 2 altered the affective
and motivational consequences of upward counterfactuals concerning preparative effort by allowing them to serve as an excuse.
Furthermore, the consequences of these thoughts are likely dependent upon the goals of the individual to either protect the self or to
improve. In many past studies, it appears that self-improvement
motivations took precedence. As a result, individuals were more
willing to accept increased negative affect in return for performance gains (Markman & McMullen, 2003; Myers & McCrea,
2008; Roese, 1994). In contrast, in the present studies, participants
were motivated to excuse failure, and thus subsequent preparation
and performance were reduced.
What then determines whether a particular counterfactual
thought serves to excuse poor performance or to identify ways to
improve and increase goal striving? A consideration of variables
that motivate self-handicapping behavior may provide a starting
point for answering this important remaining question. Although
not an exhaustive list, tasks that are important and that have
implications for self-evaluations of ability and intelligence (Shepperd & Arkin, 1989a, 1989b), the experience of noncontingent
success (Berglas & Jones, 1978; Thompson, 2004), the presence of
an audience (Hirt et al., 2000; Kolditz & Arkin, 1982), the adoption of performance rather than mastery goals (Elliot, Cury, Fryer,
& Huguet, 2006; Urdan, 2004), and the framing of a task in
prevention rather than promotion terms (Hendrix & Hirt, 2008)
have all been shown to increase self-handicapping behavior. Thus,

SELF-HANDICAPPING AND EXCUSING COUNTERFACTUALS

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

these conditions would also likely motivate individuals to use
counterfactuals for self-protection rather than for selfimprovement. In addition, the consequences of counterfactual
thinking may be moderated by variables relating to the arousal of
self-enhancement versus self-assessment motives (Sedikides &
Strube, 1997; Trope, 1986). For example, trait uncertainty (Sorrentino & Hewitt, 1984; Trope, 1986), high trait malleability
(Dunning, 1995; Dweck & Leggett, 1988), and the prior satisfaction of self-protection and emotion-regulation concerns (D. K.
Sherman & Cohen, 2006; Trope, Ferguson, & Raghunathan, 2001)
may all increase the desire to use counterfactuals to accurately
assess performance and spark self-improvement. These are fascinating questions for future research.

Implications for the Effectiveness of Self-Handicapping
In both Studies 1 and 2, the presence of a handicap in the form
of reduced preparative effort increased the generation of upward
counterfactual thoughts. These findings support the theorizing of
S. J. Sherman and McConnell (1995) that self-handicapping appears to be intended to increase the availability of upward counterfactual thoughts that identify the handicap as having prevented
a better performance. This effect also supports norm theory, in that
the presence of a clear obstacle to success is likely to be seen as
“abnormal” (Kahneman & Miller, 1986) and thus more mutable.
The finding that the increased availability of upward counterfactual thoughts can protect self-esteem following failure generates a
number of interesting predictions concerning the effectiveness of
different types of self-handicaps. Previous research has shown that
counterfactuals, particularly when upward, are more likely to focus
on controllable actions (Girotto, Legrenzi, & Rizzo, 1991; Markman et al., 1995; Roese & Olson, 1995c). Furthermore, selfhandicapping is related to prevention-based regulatory focus (Hendrix & Hirt, 2008), and a prevention focus in turn is linked to an
increase in the mutability of actions relative to inactions (Roese,
Hur, & Pennington, 1999). These findings suggest that selfhandicaps that involve a more active and controllable behavior
(e.g., taking drugs or alcohol) may be more likely to elicit excusing
counterfactuals than do uncontrollable or inactive handicaps (e.g.,
claiming lack of sleep). Indeed, the use of the induced compliance
procedure in the present studies was designed to allow participants
to generate upward counterfactual thoughts about a controllable
self-handicap. On the other hand, such controllable, intentional
handicaps are more likely to increase suspicion in others, rendering
them less effective as impression-management strategies (Baumgardner & Levy, 1988; Hirt, McCrea, & Boris, 2003). It is not clear
whether self-handicaps that are intentional are also less effective in
self-protection. Self-handicaps may require a degree of selfdeception in order to protect self-esteem, such that individuals
must convince themselves that the handicap was not intentional
(Higgins & Berglas, 1990). If so, then controllable handicaps
might actually be less effective in protecting self-esteem. These
issues await further research.

Consequences of Self-Handicapping and Counterfactual
Thinking for Performance
One of the most intriguing aspects of the current research is the
finding that excusing a poor performance undermines subsequent

289

motivation to improve in the future as well as actual future performance. The preparative benefits of counterfactual thinking have
been linked to the identification of useful strategies (Epstude &
Roese, 2008; Markman & McMullen, 2003; Roese, 1994; Roese &
Olson, 1995b), increased self-efficacy and feelings of preparedness (Epstude & Roese, 2008; Markman et al., 1995; Tal-Or et al.,
2004), and increased motivation driven by negative affect (Epstude
& Roese, 2008; Markman & McMullen, 2003; Markman et al.,
2008; Myers & McCrea, 2008). According to the reflection evaluation model (Markman & McMullen, 2003; Markman et al.,
2008), negative affect generated by upward counterfactual thinking is used as input into decisions of whether a goal has been
reached. As a result, motivational and preparative benefits of
upward counterfactuals are only observed when individuals process the thoughts in an evaluative mode and, as a result, experience
increased negative affect (Markman et al., 2008). Consistent with
this view, the present studies demonstrated that upward counterfactuals improve preparative behavior and performance only when
they are not used to excuse a poor performance.
One slight difference between past studies (e.g., Markman et al.,
2008; Myers & McCrea, 2008) and those presented here is the role
played by mood in the former and state self-esteem in the latter in
determining subsequent motivation. Although further research is
required to clarify these findings, one can tentatively suggest that
the importance of the task for self-definition is critical here. The
tasks in the present studies were designed to be ego threatening,
whereas the tasks in earlier research (Markman et al., 2008; Myers
& McCrea, 2008) were not. Thus, individuals may have viewed
satisfaction with the self (rather than mood) as a more valid cue for
motivation in the present studies.
Epstude and Roese (2008) classify the mechanisms by which
counterfactuals can influence behavior as reflecting a contentspecific pathway (i.e., increasing the specific behavior mentioned
in the thought) or a content-neutral pathway (e.g., increasing
motivation or self-efficacy). The results of the present studies seem
to be most consistent with a content-neutral, motivational process.
In contrast to a strict content-specific benefit, participants at times
behaved in a manner completely at odds with the strategy mentioned in the thoughts. For example, participants in Study 4 were
least likely to choose to listen to helpful noise for the subsequent
test when they considered how the distracting noise had impaired
their performance. It is also not the case that these effects can be
easily explained by underlying changes in self-efficacy. Preparative effects and performance benefits were found in those conditions in which self-esteem was low. Future researchers should
address the question of when counterfactuals influence performance via a content-specific pathway and when they influence
performance via a content-neutral pathway, as well as to what
extent these different mechanisms can work in tandem (Epstude &
Roese, 2008). I am currently pursuing these issues in my laboratory.
Finally, in addition to clarifying the process by which counterfactuals influence subsequent motivation and performance, the
present results suggest that self-handicapping can impair long-term
achievement by undermining subsequent motivation to improve.
Such a mechanism has not been previously demonstrated in the
self-handicapping literature. Empirical studies of the performance
consequences of self-handicapping have yielded mixed results.
Although self-handicapping likely reduces evaluation apprehen-

MCCREA

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

290

sion and thus may benefit performance at times (Leary, 1986),
handicaps involving a lack of preparation or impairment likely
directly undermine performance (Elliot et al., 2006; McCrea &
Hirt, 2001). Indeed, long-term academic performance seems to be
negatively related to the tendency to self-handicap, in particular to
reduced study effort (McCrea & Hirt, 2001; McCrea et al., in
press; Urdan, 2004; Zuckerman et al., 1998). It has generally been
assumed that such reduced study effort reflects ongoing selfhandicapping behavior (McCrea & Hirt, 2001; Zuckerman et al.,
1998). However, the current studies suggest that merely blaming
one’s failure on a handicap can reduce subsequent motivation to
prepare, resulting in worse performance. Thus, poor study effort
and declining academic performance may reflect reduced motivation resulting from self-esteem protection. To the extent that individuals are unwilling to accept responsibility for their poor performance, they are unlikely to engage in self-improvement or
apply any “lessons learned” to a subsequent task. Indeed, a wider
literature suggests that excuse-making and self-protection can undermine attempts to gain control over challenging situations and
pursue important goals (Baumeister & Tice, 1985; Crocker, Brook,
Niiya, & Villacorta, 2006; Rothbaum, Weisz, & Snyder, 1982).
Researchers interested in the effects of self-handicapping on performance should therefore examine reduced motivation and task
disengagement as possible causes of long-term performance impairment.

Conclusion
Past research on counterfactual thinking has emphasized the
various functions for the individual that these thoughts can serve.
Counterfactual thoughts have been argued to serve either a preparative function or an affective function. The present research
demonstrates that upward counterfactual thoughts can excuse poor
performances, consistent with an affective function, but at a cost to
any preparative function. Particularly in the case of selfhandicapping, upward counterfactuals may allow individuals to
continue to believe that they could have succeeded, yet make
actual achievement less likely. In other words, upward counterfactuals offer self-handicappers the opportunity to be “legends in their
own minds,” maintaining the belief that they have ability despite
objective evidence to the contrary.

References
Aiken, L. S., & West, S. G. (1991). Multiple regression: Testing and
interpreting interactions. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Algom, D., Raphaeli, N., & Cohen-Raz, L. (1986). Integration of noxious
stimulation across separate somatosensory communication systems: A
functional theory of pain. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human
Perception and Performance, 12, 92–102.
Amthauer, R., Brocke, B., Liepmann, D., & Beauducel, A. (2001).
Intelligenz-Struktur-Test 2000 R (2nd ed.). Goettingen, Germany:
Hogrefe Verlag.
Bargh, J. A., Gollwitzer, P. M., Lee-Chai, A., Barndollar, K., & Troetschel,
R. (2001). The automated will: Nonconscious activation and pursuit of
behavioral goals. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 81,
1014 –1027.
Baumeister, R. F., & Tice, D. M. (1985). Self-esteem and responses to
success and failure: Subsequent performance and intrinsic motivation.
Journal of Personality, 53, 450 – 467.
Baumgardner, A. H., & Levy, P. E. (1988). Role of self-esteem in percep-

tions of ability and effort: Illogic or insight? Personality and Social
Psychology Bulletin, 14, 429 – 438.
Berglas, S., & Jones, E. E. (1978). Drug choice as a self-handicapping
strategy in response to noncontingent success. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 36, 405– 417.
Boninger, D. S., Gleicher, F., & Strathman, A. (1994). Counterfactual
thinking: From what might have been to what may be. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 67, 297–307.
Branscombe, N. R., Wohl, M. J. A., Owen, S., Allison, J. A., & N⬘Gbala,
A. (2003). Counterfactual thinking, blame assignment, and well-being in
rape victims. Basic and Applied Social Psychology, 25, 265–273.
Brown, R. P., & Josephs, R. A. (1999). A burden of proof: Stereotype
relevance and gender differences in math performance. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 76, 246 –257.
Cattell, R. B., & Cattell, A. K. S. (1961). Test of “g”: Culture fair
intelligence test. Champaign, IL: The Institute for Personality and Ability Testing.
Covington, M. V., & Omelich, C. L. (1979). Effort: The double-edged
sword in school achievement. Journal of Educational Psychology, 71,
169 –182.
Creyer, E. H., & Guerhan, Z. (1997). Who’s to blame? Counterfactual
reasoning and the assignment of blame. Psychology and Marketing, 14,
209 –222.
Crocker, J., Brook, A. T., Niiya, Y., & Villacorta, M. (2006). The pursuit
of self-esteem: Contingencies of self-worth and self-regulation. Journal
of Personality, 74, 1749 –1771.
Dunning, D. (1995). Trait importance and modifiability as factors influencing self-assessment and self-enhancement motives. Personality and
Social Psychology Bulletin, 21, 1297–1306.
Dweck, C. S., & Leggett, E. L. (1988). A social cognitive approach to
motivation and personality. Psychological Review, 95, 256 –273.
Elliot, A. J., Cury, F., Fryer, J. W., & Huguet, P. (2006). Achievement
goals, self-handicapping, and performance attainment: A mediational
analysis. Journal of Sport and Exercise Psychology, 28, 344 –361.
Epstude, K., & Roese, N. J. (2008). The functional theory of counterfactual
thinking. Personality and Social Psychology Review, 12, 168 –192.
Feick, D. L., & Rhodewalt, F. (1997). The double-edged sword of selfhandicapping: Discounting, augmentation, and the protection and enhancement of self-esteem. Motivation and Emotion, 21, 147–163.
Festinger, L., & Carlsmith, J. M. (1959). Cognitive consequences of forced
compliance. Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology, 58, 203–210.
Girotto, V., Legrenzi, P., & Rizzo, A. (1991). Event controllability in
counterfactual thinking. Acta Psychologica, 78, 111–133.
Goerke, M., Möller, J., Schulz-Hardt, S., Napiersky, U., & Frey, D. (2004).
“It’s not my fault–– but only I can change it”: Counterfactual and
prefactual thoughts of managers. Journal of Applied Psychology, 89,
279 –292.
Harris, R. N., & Snyder, C. R. (1986). The role of uncertain self-esteem in
self-handicapping. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 51,
451– 458.
Hendrix, K. S., & Hirt, E. R. (2008). Stressed out over possible failure: The
effects of induced self-regulatory focus on claimed self-handicapping.
Unpublished manuscript, Indiana University Bloomington.
Higgins, R. L., & Berglas, S. (1990). The maintenance and treatment of
self-handicapping: From risk-taking to face-saving––and back. In R. L.
Higgins (Ed.), Self-handicapping: The paradox that isn’t. The Plenum
series in social/clinical psychology (pp. 187–238). New York: Plenum.
Higgins, R. L., & Harris, R. N. (1988). Strategic “alcohol” use: Drinking
to self-handicap. Journal of Social and Clinical Psychology, 6, 191–202.
Hirt, E. R., Deppe, R. K., & Gordon, L. J. (1991). Self-reported versus
behavioral self-handicapping: Empirical evidence for a theoretical distinction. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 61, 981–991.
Hirt, E. R., McCrea, S. M., & Boris, H. I. (2003). “I know you selfhandicapped last exam”: Gender differences in reactions to self-

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

SELF-HANDICAPPING AND EXCUSING COUNTERFACTUALS
handicapping. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 84, 177–
193.
Hirt, E. R., McCrea, S. M., & Kimble, C. E. (2000). Public self-focus and
sex differences in behavioral self-handicapping: Does increasing selfthreat still make it “just a man’s game”? Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 26, 1131–1141.
Jones, E. E., & Berglas, S. (1978). Control of attributions about the self
through self-handicapping strategies: The appeal of alcohol and the role
of underachievement. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 4,
200 –206.
Kahneman, D., & Miller, D. T. (1986). Norm theory: Comparing reality to
its alternatives. Psychological Review, 93, 136 –153.
Kanner, A. D., Coyne, J. C., Schaeffer, C., & Lazarus, R. S. (1981).
Comparison of two modes of stress measurement: Daily hassles and
uplifts versus major life events. Journal of Behavioral Medicine, 4,
1–39.
Kolditz, T. A., & Arkin, R. M. (1982). An impression management
interpretation of the self-handicapping strategy. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 43, 492–502.
Leary, M. R. (1986). The impact of interactional impediments on social
anxiety and self-presentation. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 22, 122–135.
Mandel, D. R. (2003). Judgment dissociation theory: An analysis of differences in causal, counterfactual, and covariational reasoning. Journal
of Personality and Social Psychology, 132, 419 – 434.
Mandel, D. R., & Lehman, D. R. (1996). Counterfactual thinking and
ascriptions of cause and preventability. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 71, 450 – 463.
Markman, K. D., Gavanski, I., Sherman, S. J., & McMullen, M. N. (1993).
The mental simulation of better and worse possible worlds. Journal of
Experimental Social Psychology, 29, 87–109.
Markman, K. D., Gavanski, I., Sherman, S. J., & McMullen, M. N. (1995).
The impact of perceived control on the imagination of better and worse
possible worlds. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 21, 588 –
595.
Markman, K. D., & McMullen, M. N. (2003). A reflection and evaluation
model of comparative thinking. Personality and Social Psychology
Review, 7, 244 –267.
Markman, K. D., McMullen, M. N., & Elizaga, R. A. (2008). Counterfactual thinking, persistence, and performance: A test of the Reflection and
Evaluation Model. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 44,
421– 428.
Markman, K. D., & Tetlock, P. E. (2000a). Accountability and close-call
counterfactuals: The loser who nearly won and the winner who nearly
lost. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 26, 1213–1224.
Markman, K. D., & Tetlock, P. E. (2000b). ‘I couldn’t have known’:
Accountability, foreseeability and counterfactual denials of responsibility. British Journal of Social Psychology, 39, 313–325.
McCrea, S. M. (2007). Counterfactual thinking following negative outcomes: Evidence for group and self-protective biases. European Journal
of Social Psychology, 37, 1256 –1271.
McCrea, S. M., & Hirt, E. R. (2001). The role of ability judgments in
self-handicapping. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 27,
1378 –1389.
McCrea, S. M., Hirt, E. R., Hendrix, K. S., Milner, B. J., & Steele, N. L.
(in press). The Worker scale: Developing a measure to explain gender
differences in behavioral self-handicapping. Journal of Research in
Personality.
McCrea, S. M., Hirt, E. R., & Milner, B. J. (2008). She works hard for the
money: Valuing effort underlies gender differences in behavioral selfhandicapping. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 44, 292–311.
McFarland, C., & Ross, M. (1982). Impact of causal attributions on
affective reactions to success and failure. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 43, 937–946.

291

McMullen, M. N. (1997). Affective contrast and assimilation in counterfactual thinking. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 33, 77–
100.
McMullen, M. N., & Markman, K. D. (2000). Downward counterfactuals
and motivation: The wake-up call and the Pangloss effect. Personality
and Social Psychology Bulletin, 26, 575–584.
McMullen, M. N., & Markman, K. D. (2002). Affective impact of close
counterfactuals: Implications of possible futures for possible pasts. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 38, 64 –70.
Myers, A. L., & McCrea, S. M. (2008). The preparative function of
counterfactual thinking: Providing useful strategies or enhancing motivation. Unpublished manuscript, University of Konstanz, Germany.
Niedenthal, P. M., Tangney, J. P., & Gavanski, I. (1994). “If only I
weren’t” versus “If only I hadn’t”: Distinguishing shame and guilt in
counterfactual thinking. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
67, 585–595.
Oleson, K. C., Poehlmann, K. M., Yost, J. H., Lynch, M. E., & Arkin,
R. M. (2000). Subjective overachievement: Individual differences in
self-doubt and concern with performance. Journal of Personality, 68,
491–524.
Ouis, D. (2001). Annoyance from road traffic noise: A review. Journal of
Environmental Psychology, 21, 101–120.
Rhodewalt, F. (1990). Self-handicappers: Individual differences in the
preference for anticipatory, self-protective acts. In R. L. Higgins, C. R.
Snyder, & S. Berglas (Eds.), Self-handicapping: The paradox that isn’t.
The Plenum series in social/clinical psychology (pp. 69 –106). New
York: Plenum.
Rhodewalt, F., Morf, C., Hazlett, S., & Fairfield, M. (1991). Selfhandicapping: The role of discounting and augmentation in the preservation of self-esteem. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 61,
122–131.
Roese, N. J. (1994). The functional basis of counterfactual thinking.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 66, 805– 818.
Roese, N. J., Hur, T., & Pennington, G. L. (1999). Counterfactual thinking
and regulatory focus: Implications for action versus inaction and sufficiency versus necessity. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
77, 1109 –1120.
Roese, N. J., & Olson, J. M. (1993). Self-esteem and counterfactual
thinking. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 65, 199 –206.
Roese, N. J., & Olson, J. M. (1995a). Counterfactual thinking: A critical
overview. In N. J. Roese & J. M. Olson (Eds.), What might have been:
The social psychology of counterfactual thinking (pp. 1–55). Hillsdale,
NJ: Erlbaum.
Roese, N. J., & Olson, J. M. (1995b). Functions of counterfactual thinking.
In N. J. Roese & J. M. Olson (Eds.), What might have been: The social
psychology of counterfactual thinking (pp. 169 –197). Hillsdale, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Roese, N. J., & Olson, J. M. (1995c). Outcome controllability and counterfactual thinking. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 21,
620 – 628.
Rosenberg, M. (1965). Society and adolescent self-image. Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press.
Rothbaum, F., Weisz, J. R., & Snyder, S. S. (1982). Changing the world
and changing the self: A two-process model of perceived control. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 42, 5–37.
Sanna, L. J., Carter, S. E., & Small, E. M. (2006). The road not taken:
Counterfactual thinking over time. In L. J. Sanna & E. C. Chang (Eds.),
Judgments over time: The interplay of thoughts, feelings, and behaviors
(pp. 163–181). New York: Oxford University Press.
Sanna, L. J., Chang, E. C., & Meier, S. (2001). Counterfactual thinking and
self-motives. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 27, 1023–
1034.
Sedikides, C., & Strube, M. J. (1997). Self-evaluation: To thine own self be
good, to thine own self be sure, to thine own self be true, and to thy own

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

292

MCCREA

self be better. In M. P. Zanna (Ed.), Advances in experimental social
psychology (Vol. 29, pp. 209 –269). New York: Academic Press.
Sevdalis, N., & Kokkinaki, F. (2006). The differential effect of realistic and
unrealistic counterfactual thinking on regret. Acta Psychologica, 122,
111–128.
Shepperd, J. A., & Arkin, R. M. (1989a). Determinants of selfhandicapping: Task importance and the effects of preexisting handicaps
on self-generated handicaps. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 15, 101–112.
Shepperd, J. A., & Arkin, R. M. (1989b). Self-handicapping: The moderating roles of public self-consciousness and task importance. Personality
and Social Psychology Bulletin, 15, 252–265.
Sherman, D. K., & Cohen, G. L. (2006). The psychology of self-defense:
Self-affirmation theory. In M. P. Zanna (Ed.), Advances in experimental
social psychology (Vol. 38, pp. 183–242). San Diego, CA: Elsevier.
Sherman, S. J., & McConnell, A. R. (1995). Dysfunctional implications of
counterfactual thinking: When alternatives to reality fail us. In N. J.
Roese & J. M. Olson (Eds.), What might have been: The social psychology of counterfactual thinking (pp. 199 –231). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Smith, E. E. (1961). The power of dissonance techniques to change
attitudes. Public Opinion Quarterly, 25, 626 – 639.
Sorrentino, R. M., & Hewitt, E. C. (1984). The uncertainty-reducing
properties of achievement tasks revisited. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 47, 884 – 899.
Tabachnik, B. G., & Fidell, L. S. (2001). Using multivariate statistics (4th
ed.). New York: HarperCollins.

Tal-Or, N., Boninger, D. S., & Gleicher, F. (2004). On becoming what we
might have been: Counterfactual thinking and self-efficacy. Self and
Identity, 3, 5–26.
Thompson, T. (2004). Re-examining the effects of noncontingent success
on self-handicapping behaviour. British Journal of Educational Psychology, 74, 239 –260.
Trope, Y. (1986). Self-enhancement and self-assessment in achievement
behavior. In R. M. Sorrentino & E. T. Higgins (Eds.), Handbook of
motivation and cognition: Foundations of social behavior (pp. 350 –
378). New York: Guilford Press.
Trope, Y., Ferguson, M., & Raghunathan, R. (2001). Mood as a resource
in processing self-relevant information. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Urdan, T. (2004). Predictors of academic self-handicapping and achievement: Examining achievement goals, classroom goal structures, and
culture. Journal of Educational Psychology, 96, 251–264.
Weiner, B. (1985). An attributional theory of achievement motivation and
emotion. Psychological Review, 92, 548 –573.
Wells, G. L., & Gavanski, I. (1989). Mental simulation of causality.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 56, 161–169.
Zuckerman, M., Kieffer, S. C., & Knee, C. R. (1998). Consequences of
self-handicapping: Effects on coping, academic performance, and adjustment. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 74, 1619 –1628.

Received March 16, 2007
Revision received March 13, 2008
Accepted March 16, 2008 䡲

E-Mail Notification of Your Latest Issue Online!
Would you like to know when the next issue of your favorite APA journal will be available
online? This service is now available to you. Sign up at http://notify.apa.org/ and you will be
notified by e-mail when issues of interest to you become available!

