Journal of Personality and Social Psychology
2008, Vol. 94, No. 4, 615– 630

Copyright 2008 by the American Psychological Association
0022-3514/08/$12.00 DOI: 10.1037/0022-3514.94.4.615

Social Identity Contingencies: How Diversity Cues Signal Threat or Safety
for African Americans in Mainstream Institutions
Valerie Purdie-Vaughns

Claude M. Steele

Yale University

Stanford University

Paul G. Davies

Ruth Ditlmann

University of British Columbia, Okanagan

Yale University

Jennifer Randall Crosby
Agnes Scott College
This research demonstrates that people at risk of devaluation based on group membership are attuned
to cues that signal social identity contingencies— judgments, stereotypes, opportunities, restrictions,
and treatments that are tied to one’s social identity in a given setting. In 3 experiments, African
American professionals were attuned to minority representation and diversity philosophy cues when
they were presented as a part of workplace settings. Low minority representation cues coupled with
colorblindness (as opposed to valuing diversity) led African American professionals to perceive
threatening identity contingencies and to distrust the setting (Experiment 1). The authors then
verified that the mechanism mediating the effect of setting cues on trust was identity contingent
evaluations (Experiments 2 & 3). The power of social identity contingencies as they relate to
underrepresented groups in mainstream institutions is discussed.
Keywords: identity threat, African Americans, diversity, stigma

This description captures the predicament facing American
mainstream institutions today. From university classrooms to corporate offices, institutions have become more demographically
diverse (Mannix & Neale, 2005). Yet, a remaining challenge in
realizing an integrated society is making these settings function so
that people in them feel safe and trusting. For individuals whose
identities have been historically devalued, these settings can
prompt a basic question: How does one know whether one’s social
identity places one under threat?

Our research begins with an assumption: Settings themselves
have the power to signal the degree of threat or safety a person
will experience. That is, certain features or cues in a setting may
create the expectation that a person’s treatment will be contingent on one of their social identities. Social identity contingencies are possible judgments, stereotypes, opportunities, restrictions, and treatments that are tied to one’s social identity in a
given setting (Steele, Spencer, & Aronson, 2002). Such cues as
the number of individuals who share a given identity or the
nature of the diversity philosophy at play are cues that might
convey contingencies attached to particular social identities.
Accordingly, these cues can determine—independent of any
personal experience in the setting—the extent to which a person
will trust and feel comfortable in a given setting.
Substantial progress has been made in detailing the consequences of contending with the threat of being judged through the

Valerie Purdie-Vaughns and Ruth Ditlmann, Department of Psychology,
Yale University; Claude M. Steele, Department of Psychology, Stanford
University; Paul G. Davies, Department of Psychology, University of
British Columbia, Okanagan, Kelowna, British Columbia, Canada; Jennifer Randall Crosby, Department of Psychology, Agnes Scott College.
This article is based on Valerie Purdie-Vaughns’s doctoral dissertation
submitted to Stanford University. Portions of this research were presented
at the third annual meeting of the Society for Personality and Social
Psychology (SPSP) in Savannah, Georgia, in January 2002 and at the fifth
annual meeting of the Society for the Psychological Study of Social Issues
(SPSSI) in Washington, DC, in June 2004. This research was supported in

part by a predoctoral National Research Service Award awarded to Valerie
Purdie-Vaughns and a Russell Sage Foundation Grant awarded to Claude
M. Steele.
We thank the dissertation committee members, Hazel Markus, Jennifer
Eberhardt, Robert Zajonc, and Dale Griffin, for comments on an earlier
version of this article. We extend thanks to Geoffrey Cohen, Margaret
Clark, Geraldine Downey, Richard Eibach, and Gregory Walton for their
valuable comments on drafts of this article.
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Valerie
Purdie-Vaughns, Department of Psychology, Yale University, 2 Hillhouse
Avenue, New Haven, CT 06520. E-mail: valerie.purdie@yale.edu

Decades after colleges and universities across the country began
actively recruiting minority students, many campuses are more
diverse than ever. But that does not mean that students connect
across racial and ethnic lines. . . . The whole discussion used to be
about numbers. . . . Now it is about what kind of educational
environment is in place.
—The New York Times

615

616

PURDIE-VAUGHNS ET AL.

lens of a negative stereotype, such as the effects on performance
and related achievement outcomes (Davies, Spencer, & Steele,
2005; Schmader & Johns, 2003; Steele & Aronson, 1995; for
reviews, see Steele et al., 2002). Yet, considerably less is known
about people’s appraisal of what a given setting might be like
further upstream, before they experience the setting directly. If
aspects of a setting convey devaluation of one’s group identity, a
person may chose not to enter the setting or may leave before ever
reaching the performance stage. Given the impairing effect of
stereotype threat at the performance stage, a deeper understanding
of which cues lead people to appraise settings as likely to be
threatening or safe is desirable. Illuminating this process may
establish how people come to sense a “threat in the air” in settings
where stereotypes about their group are relevant.
The first objective of the present research was to identify
social identity contingencies that are relevant to African Americans’ racial identity in corporate settings. Because corporate
workplaces can be ambiguous with respect to whether African
American identity is valued (Sinclair & Kunda, 1999), African
Americans’ beliefs and expectations may vary with small
changes in cues relevant to the workplace. Our second objective
was, therefore, to identify situational cues that are also relevant
to African Americans’ racial identity in the corporate workplace. The present research focused on the number of other
minority group members in the setting and the diversity philosophy of the setting; that is, whether the setting stresses a
principle of colorblindness or a principle of valuing diversity.
Our final objective was to examine the types of identity contingencies that African Americans expected to face in response
to the interaction of these cues and the implications of these
expectations for African Americans’ trust and feelings of comfort.

Identity-Threatening and Identity-Safe Settings
People who belong to stigmatized groups may question whether
their group is valued in mainstream settings (e.g., workplaces,
schools, religious settings), especially in ones in which their group
has been historically discriminated against or stereotyped (Allport,
1954; Major & O’Brien, 2005; Steele et al., 2002). We use the
term social identity contingencies to refer to the range of vulnerabilities and opportunities a person expects to face based on the
settings’ response to one or more of the person’s social identities.
When group members expect their social identity contingencies to
be negative or to confirm that their group will be devalued, the
setting can be characterized as threatening. When group members
expect their social identity contingencies to be positive or neutral,
the setting can be characterized as identity-safe. Accordingly,
social identity contingencies convey the degree of threat or safety
with which one perceives the setting.
Because people’s concerns about their identity value are tied to
specific settings (Goffman, 1963), group members draw information from situational cues that hold relevance for the value and the
status accorded to their group. Situational cues can be physical—
rows of Razor scooters outside an Internet company may be a cue
for an “old school” programmer, ideological—a competitive versus relational ethos in a science department may be a cue for a
female scientist— or social—the presence of neighbors from the
same small town may be a cue for an immigrant family. Any

object, event, person, or place that activates a particular social
identity can be a situational cue (Abrams & Hogg, 1999; Goffman,
1971; Warr, 1990).
The central hypothesis we test is that situational cues trigger
people’s expectations about the kinds of social identity contingencies they may face, and these expectations affect whether
people can trust and feel comfortable in a given setting. People
trust settings that are impartial, that are consistent with a
person’s values, and that convey belongingness (Buchan, Croson, & Dawes, 2002; Tyler, 2001). Distrust of a setting undermines outcomes critical to success, such as motivation (Cohen,
Steele, & Ross, 1999) and achievement (Irving & Hudley,
2005). These implications are consistent with identitythreatening and identity-safe environments.
The notion that situational cues have implications for social
identity salience is supported by several lines of research. Goffman
(1971) noted that people attend to cues that convey whether their
immediate surroundings are normal or physically safe. Stereotype
threat research shows that watching stereotypic television commercials (Davies et al., 2005), being outnumbered in a math
classroom (Inzlicht & Ben-Zeev, 2000; Inzlicht & Good, 2006), or
hearing a rumor about a sexist tutor (Adams, Garcia, PurdieVaughns, & Steele, 2006) are all cues that may cause underperformance in test-taking situations. It is also known that people
attend to prejudice-relevant cues when making attributions of
discrimination (Feldman-Barrett & Swim, 1998; Inman & Baron,
1996; Major, Quinton, & Schmader, 2003).
It is important to note that these findings emphasize the
consequences of contending with cues after one has entered a
setting and is performing some role-relevant behavior. The
present investigation extends this past research in two significant ways. First, in the present research, we focus on individuals attending to situational cues to gauge whether threat is
potentially on the horizon. Although researchers have theorized
about how people appraise cues as they initially enter settings
(for reviews, see Major & O’Brien, 2005), empirical research
establishing how threat is initiated at this early stage is lacking.
Second, in the present research, we explore institutional cues
rather than interpersonal ones. The cues we investigated are
divorced from interpersonal interactions. One question relevant
to stigmatization processes is what aspects of an environment
convey threat in the absence of intentional discrimination. We
suggest that the present research can help answer this question.

Social Identity Contingencies
Our first objective was to identify possible social identity contingencies that are relevant to African Americans’ racial identity in
corporate settings. One set of contingencies may involve African
Americans’ concerns about confirming negative stereotypes about
their intellectual ability. Negative stereotypes are one of many
social identity contingencies (Steele et al., 2002). Another set may
relate to expectations about the value of African American racial
identity compared with other identities (Tajfel & Turner, 1979). In
response to these contingencies, African Americans may develop
expectations of discrimination or marginalization.
However, there are also other, perhaps more subtle, social
identity contingencies that may arise. A predominantly White
corporate setting may lead African Americans to suspect that their

SOCIAL IDENTITY CONTINGENCIES

identity is merely different or counternormative (Kanter, 1977;
Yoshino, 2006). As a consequence, African Americans may expect
to face social exclusion if they fail to conform to established norms
(Walton & Cohen, 2007) or to face added scrutiny due to the
salience of their racial identity (McGuire, McGuire, Child, &
Fujioko, 1978). However, contingencies are not necessarily always
negative. African Americans may recognize that their racial identity is irrelevant or neutral in a given setting or is even positive in
some respects—for instance, if one’s differentness creates positive
visibility (Kanter, 1977). Threatening and positive contingencies
may even be present simultaneously; in this case, it is the net effect
of these countervailing weights that determines one’s overall sense
of trust and comfort in the setting.
When situational cues convey threatening identity contingencies, or when threatening contingencies outweigh positive ones,
we expect African Americans to distrust the setting. When cues
refute threatening identity contingencies, however, or when positive contingencies outweigh threatening ones, we expect African
Americans to trust the setting. We measured identity contingencies
via participants’ open-ended descriptions of the setting (Experiment 1), responses to diagnostic scenarios that may activate threat
(Experiment 2), and measures assessing the degree to which racial
identity is perceived to be relevant to others’ evaluations and
assessments (Experiment 3).

Cues Triggering Social Identity Contingencies
Our second objective was to identify cues relevant to African
Americans’ racial identity in the corporate workplace and to
test whether the cues activate or refute these social identity
contingencies. The first cue we examined was the number of
people in a setting who share a given social identity. High or
low minority representation is identity-relevant for African
Americans because it influences friendship networks (Kanter,
1977), hiring decisions (Yoder, Crumpton, & Zipp, 1989),
token status (Lord & Saenz, 1985; Sekaquaptewa & Thompson,
2003), and performance (Inzlicht & Ben-Zeev, 2000)—all factors that affect one’s fate in the setting.
We expect that high minority representation will not activate threatening identity contingencies among African Americans. Numbers can serve
as evidence of nondiscrimination, as well as evidence that one’s identity
is valued. In contrast, we expect low minority representation to cause one
of two effects. On the one hand, it can activate threatening identity
contingencies if African Americans perceive small numbers as conveying
discrimination or marginalization. On the other hand, it can refute threatening identity contingencies if African Americans expected small numbers to be benign. For instance, if African Americans expected that their
racial identity would be valued or would not be limited in the setting
despite low minority representation (Kanter, 1977) then small numbers
should be perceived as nonthreatening. Because low minority representation is open to both threatening and safe interpretations, African Americans may attend to additional cues—such as the stated diversity philosophy—to disambiguate its meaning.
Two prominent diversity philosophies represent opposing sides
of America’s debate concerning how to achieve positive intergroup relations: One is based on theories of assimilation, or colorblindness, and the other is based on theories of multiculturalism,
or valuing diversity (Markus, Steele, & Steele, 2000; Plaut, 2002;
Verkuyten, 2005; Wolsko, Park, Judd, & Wittenbrink, 2000).

617

Their prominence as equally well-intentioned guiding philosophies
in workplace settings make them a rich second cue to explore.
Assumptions underlying the colorblind philosophy include notions that people are universally similar and that group differences
should be minimized1 (Levy, West, & Ramirez, 2005; Markus et
al., 2000; Schofield, 1986). Traditionally, this philosophy has been
invoked to reduce discrimination. Interpreted in this way, a colorblind diversity philosophy is not diagnostic of marginalization, and
we expect this cue to refute African Americans’ expectations of
threatening identity contingencies. Yet, colorblindness can be interpreted in another way. Colorblindness can also be seen as a
means to ignore or invalidate the challenges that come with stigmatized group identities (Bonilla-Silva, 2006). Interpreted in this
way, a colorblind diversity philosophy is diagnostic of marginalization, and we expect this cue to activate threatening social
identity contingencies.
Assumptions underlying the value-diversity philosophy include
notions that group differences should be the basis for mutual
respect and that these differences should be valued (Fredrickson,
1999; Markus et al., 2000; Sears, Citrin, Cheleden, & van Laar,
1999). Interpreted in this way, we expect this cue to refute threatening identity contingencies. But like colorblindness, the valuediversity philosophy can also be interpreted in a different, more
negative way. It could be taken to mean that minority group
members will be valued only for their difference (Carter, 1991).
Perhaps if African Americans already perceive a setting to be safe,
then introducing messages that claim to value diversity may trigger
this more negative interpretation.
In addition to examining the effects of each cue, a third
objective of the present research is to explore how these two
cues interact. Three models are relevant to the present analysis:
a dominance model, a consistency model, and a dynamic interactive model.
First, one cue may be so dominant as to overshadow the signal
of the other cue. Given past research highlighting the centrality of
minority representation to one’s daily experiences, African Americans might attend to minority representation cues and discount
diversity philosophy cues. If this is correct then regardless of an
institution’s stated diversity philosophy, African Americans
should be more likely to expect threatening identity contingencies
when exposed to low minority representation cues rather than high
minority representation cues.
Second, inconsistent setting cues may be more threatening
than consistent ones. People are more likely to attend to inconsistent and novel category conjunctions than to consistent and
familiar conjunctions (Hutter & Crisp, 2005; see also, Kunda,
1990). From this reasoning, it would seem that low minority
1
A brief discussion of colorblind philosophy versus assimilationist
philosophy is warranted. Policies with a colorblind approach tend to
emphasize personal identity and de-emphasize ethnic and racial categories
(see Plaut, 2002; Schofield, 1986). Policies with an assimilationist approach tend to emphasize changing the behavior and beliefs of the minority
group to blend in with the majority group (see Fredrickson, 1999;
Verkuyten, 2005). We observed that corporate literature in the United
States tends to frame corporations’ diversity philosophy as colorblind (i.e.,
“race, gender does not matter here”) rather than as assimilationist (i.e.,
“change your group identity to be like us”). Hence, the present research
focuses on colorblindness rather than on assimilation.

PURDIE-VAUGHNS ET AL.

618

representation coupled with a value-diversity philosophy would
convey threatening identity contingencies. Presumably, these
inconsistent cues indicate a form of hypocrisy that triggers
concerns about the setting.
The third model allows for an interactive effect such that the
perceived meaning of diversity philosophy cues may change
depending on higher or lower levels of minority representation
cues. Peoples’ attitudes toward ideologies change in different
social contexts, and this is particularly true of ideologies such
as colorblindness, which are open to multiple interpretations
(Levy et al., 2005). Applied to the current paradigm, the dynamic interactive model suggests that as minority representation changes from low to high, African Americans’ appraisal of
the colorblind cue may change from threatening to benign.
Although the same effect is plausible for the value-diversity
cue, its positive valence in corporate settings (Thomas, 2001)
may make this cue more impervious to interactive effects.

identity concerns (Tsai, 2001). Participants completed open-ended
descriptions of concerns they expected to have in response to the
workplace they read about. We were interested in the effect of
condition on the overall number of identity contingencies participants reported and in the balance of threatening versus affirming
identity contingencies. After completing open-ended descriptions,
participants rated how much trust and comfort they anticipated
feeling in the setting.
The dynamic interactive model predicts that African Americans’
trust would diminish and that their expectations of social identity
contingencies would increase when one cue changes the interpretation of other cues. Other models might predict that trust would
diminish when cues are inconsistent or when one cue is dominant
in the setting.

Method
Participants

Present Research
In the present experiments, we tested the postulated effect of
minority representation and diversity philosophy cues on the kinds
of social identity contingencies that African Americans expect to
face in workplace settings. We exposed African American professionals to hypothetical corporate settings by developing corporate
brochures and supplementing them with a corporate booth designed to look like a consulting firm on a recruiting trip. Minority
representation was presented as the number of minority staff
members included in brochure photographs. Diversity philosophy
cues were presented as a quotation from the company president.
The purpose of Experiment 1 was to establish the kinds of social
identity contingencies African Americans would spontaneously
report. We also explored how cues might interact to convey
identity contingencies and how expectations of these contingencies
affected African Americans’ trust and feelings of comfort. In
Experiment 2, we tested whether the underlying mechanism mediating the effect of the stated cues on African Americans’ trust is
their expectations of negative identity contingencies. In Experiment 3, we tested one intervention that could alter the way African
Americans interpret setting cues, and we examined whether this
intervention neutralized threatening identity contingencies and restored African Americans’ trust.

Experiment 1
In Experiment 1, we exposed African American professionals to
different combinations of minority representation and diversity
philosophy cues. We tested whether these cues affected the kinds
of identity contingencies African Americans generated and the
implications for African Americans’ trust and feelings of comfort.
Participation in Experiments 1 and 2 were restricted to African
Americans because other experiments consistently showed that the
cues and the experimental paradigm under examination do not
affect the trust and comfort levels of White Americans.2 Accordingly, this experiment took the form of a 2 (minority representation: high vs. low) ⫻ 2 (diversity philosophy cue: colorblind vs.
value-diversity) between-subjects factorial design.
To measure expectations of social identity contingencies, we
used a qualitative methodology developed to assess cross-cultural

We recruited 62 African American professionals (40 women, 22
men) from an African American networking mixer in the San
Francisco Bay area. Participants were run onsite and were paid $10
on completion of the experiment. Mean age of participants was
37.05 years (SD ⫽ 8.32; range ⫽ 18 –54 years). Of the participants, 96% had obtained at least a college education and 85%
reported working in a corporate setting. Average length of time
participants reported working in a corporate setting was 11.18
years (SD ⫽ 7.34; range ⫽ 0.3–30 years). One participant who
identified herself as a White American was excluded, yielding 61
participants in the final analysis. Participants were randomly assigned to one of four experimental conditions.

Stimulus Materials
A trifold brochure described the ostensible vision, services, and
employee base of a management consulting firm. The bulk of the
pamphlet outlined the company in detail; these sections remained
constant across conditions. Our cues of interest were depicted as
two small sections of the brochure; these cues varied by condition.
Diversity philosophy cues were presented in the form of a quote,
made by the president, in the section labeled “Our People.”
Participants in the colorblind condition read the following:
While other consulting firms mistakenly focus on their staff’s diversity, we train our diverse workforce to embrace their similarities. We
feel that focusing on similarities creates a more unified, exciting, and
collaborative work environment. Such an inclusive and accepting
environment helps not only us but also our clients. And at CCG, if
you’re a team player, you’ll have unlimited access to success. Your

2
Earlier research has shown that minority representation and diversity
philosophy cues do not affect the trust and comfort of Whites (PurdieVaughns, 2004). Eighty-one White college students participated in the
earlier study. That experiment took the form of a 2 (minority representation: high vs. low) ⫻ 3 (diversity philosophy cue: colorblind vs. valuediversity vs. control) between-subjects factorial design. The primary dependent measure was ratings of trust. The procedures were identical to
Experiment 1. For White participants, the cues depicted in the brochure did
not affect trust and comfort toward the company setting, (Fs ⬍ 1.5).

SOCIAL IDENTITY CONTINGENCIES
race, ethnicity, gender, and religion are immaterial as soon as you
walk through our doors.

Participants in the value-diversity condition read the following:
While other consulting firms mistakenly try to shape their staff into a
single mold, we believe that embracing our diversity enriches our
culture. Diversity fosters a more unified, exciting, and collaborative
work environment. Such an inclusive and accepting environment
helps not only us but also our clients. And at CCG, all individuals
have unlimited access to success. As soon as you walk through our
doors, you’ll appreciate the strength that we derive from our diversity.

High or low minority representation cues were presented in the
form of three group photographs depicting groups of working
employees. To select these photographs, digital color photographs
of professionally dressed individuals were gathered from a Microsoft Gallery database. This first stage yielded 20 photographs.
Next, two coders independently categorized the photographs as to
whether minority group members were represented. Only photographs with 100% agreement by both coders were selected at this
stage. Finally, photographs depicting higher or lower proportions
of minorities were matched to be similar in group composition.
This selection process identified 6 photographs: 3 that reliably
depicted high minority representation and 3 that reliably depicted
low minority representation. It is important to note that photographs depicted a broad range of demographic diversity (see
Appendix A).

Measures
Social identity contingencies. Participants were asked to visualize both positive and negative experiences they might have in the
setting and to report any concerns they anticipated facing. This
prompt ended with the following two questions: “Given the work
environment implied by CCG, what group-based concerns (race,
gender, sexual orientation, social status), if any, might you have?”
and “Given the work environment implied by CCG, what groupbased experiences (race, gender, sexual orientation, social status),
if any, might you have?” Participants were asked to use full
sentences and to report a minimum of eight experiences or concerns. Each response was coded as one response unit.
Our coding scheme comprised 11 categories. Table 1 provides
examples of all coding categories. Participant response units included racial identity concerns (e.g., “How will I be viewed as an
African American?”), racial identity positive expectations (e.g., “I
would get along just fine with other people here”), other identitybased concerns (e.g., “There may be few women here and I might
be excluded”), and nonidentity-based responses (e.g., “I am not
sure what this company does”). Categories were included in the
analysis of social identity contingencies if they included racial
identity–relevant aspects of the self. Accordingly, the two categories, “concern about being devalued due to racial identity” and
“positive treatment in company due to racial identity” were used in
the final analysis.
Responses were coded by two coders (one African American,
one White American) unaware of the study hypotheses and conditions. Response units ranged from 0 (did not write any concerns)
to 12 (wrote 12 concerns). Coders categorized and counted the
number of response units assigned to each category. Response

619

units could only be coded once. Interrater reliability was .97 (SD ⫽
.02, Range ⫽ .92–1.00) as determined by percentage agreement
across 11 categories.
Trust and comfort. Our primary measure was a measure participants’ trust of and comfort toward the setting, which consisted
of 11 items (e.g., “I think I would trust the management to treat me
fairly”) measured on 7-point Likert-type scales anchored by disagree (1) and agree (7). See Appendix B for all items. Internal
reliability (Cronbach’s ␣) was .92. All items were adapted from
questionnaires measuring trust and satisfaction in the workplace
(Tyler & Blader, 2000).
Manipulation checks. Participants completed two items measuring sensitivity to minority group representation and diversity
philosophy cues. The first item asked about the ethnic composition
of the brochure, and the item was measured on a 7-point Likert
scale anchored by not at all diverse (1) and extremely diverse (7).
The second item asked about the extent to which group differences
were valued in the work setting, and the item was anchored by not
at all (1) and extremely (7).

Procedure
Four experimenters (two African American men, two African
American women) ran the study. To increase the plausibility of the
cover story, the experimental booth was set up between other
corporate booths and was decorated with fictitious recruiting firm
paraphernalia. Our booth looked identical to other businesses that
were advertising at the mixer. Participants were recruited throughout the mixer and were invited to the booth to participate in the
study. Before the study began, the experimenters, who were unaware of condition and hypotheses, were provided with newsletters
for each condition in sealed, unmarked envelopes.
Participants were run in small groups of 1 to 4. Participants run
in groups were individually, randomly assigned to condition. On
providing consent, participants were told this study explored
whether impression formation about companies is influenced by
text presentation (i.e., web based versus hard copy). All participants were told they were in the hard copy condition. We then
asked participants to read and evaluate our corporate materials.
Participants selected one of the four unmarked envelopes, waited
for the experimenter to exit the booth, and reviewed their brochure.
Once participants finished reading the brochure, they resealed it in
the envelope, thus allowing the experimenters to remain blind to
condition. The experimenter then administered the dependent measures. Once participants completed all dependent measures, they
were asked to place all study materials and measures in “the
company mailing box” outside the booth, thus ending the study.
Participants were then debriefed. The debriefing session included
a check for suspicion, which confirmed that all participants still
believed the company was real. They were then thoroughly debriefed, thanked for their participation, and paid.

Results
Manipulation Checks
The 2 (minority representation cue: high or low) ⫻ 2 (diversity philosophy cue: colorblind or value-diversity) analysis of
variance (ANOVA) on the degree of ethnic diversity depicted in

PURDIE-VAUGHNS ET AL.

620

Table 1
Categories Used to Code Open-Ended Responses of Perceived Identity Contingencies, Proportion of Agreement, and Percentages of
Each Category by Condition in Experiment 1
Low minority
representation

High minority
representation

Category

Examples

Agree

Colorblind

Value
diversity

Colorblind

Value
diversity

F

p

Concern about devaluation
due to racial identity

African Americans tend
to hit a glass ceiling

.978

24.63

14.32

10.73

22.45

4.15

.05*

Potential jobs in company

Attend client charities

.987

17.93

26.14

9.86

8.13

0.86

.37

Skeptical of diversity as
real practice at CCG

It claims to be inclusive
but seems like a
sales pitch

1.00

12.17

8.32

12.88

0.77

.39

Concerned about what
colorblindness means

Who decides which
similarities are
critical? What do you
mean train all people
to be the same?

1.00

7.02

3.19

15.73

1.11

1.93

.17

What does company do?

How does the company
handle internal
operational
problems?

8.56

18.94

3.96

9.47

0.25

.61

Lacks minority
representation

I saw no people of
color, even by the
diversity section

7.57

6.23

1.44

2.78

0.29

.59

Concern about devaluation
due to other identity

Women are
discriminated against

4.82

4.57

7.05

14.64

1.36

.25

Social responsibility
concerns

Is there any community
service?

5.78

4.19

6.90

6.67

0.04

.84

Overly competitive

Political infighting

.947

1.78

4.77

4.16

4.81

0.26

.61

Miscellaneous

Ideas are key

.952

2.57

—

6.85

3.88

0.01

.93

Positive treatment due to
racial identity

I’d feel that it would be
a comfortable place
to work

.974

—

9.32

20.42

8.15

6.11

.02*

.978

1.00

.929

1.00

17.9

Note. The F value and p value are based on the interaction effect of the two-way analysis of variance; df ⫽ 57, for all variables. Dashes indicate that there
was no response in the condition.
*
p ⬍ .05.

the photographs revealed a significant main effect, F(1, 57) ⫽
35.42, p ⫽ .001, with participants who saw more minorities
rating the company as more diverse (M ⫽ 4.63, SD ⫽ 1.54) than
did participants who saw fewer minorities (M ⫽ 2.35, SD ⫽
1.52). Neither the main effect of diversity philosophy nor the
interaction effect was significant (Fs ⬍ 1). The 2 ⫻ 2 ANOVA
on the stated diversity philosophy revealed a significant main

effect of diversity philosophy, F(1, 57) ⫽ 9.54, p ⫽ .003.
Participants in the colorblind condition, (M ⫽ 3.03, SD ⫽ 1.86)
rated the company as acknowledging backgrounds and differences significantly less than did participants in the valuediversity condition (M ⫽ 4.38, SD ⫽ 1.68). Again, neither the
main effect of depicted diversity nor the interaction effect was
significant (Fs ⬍ 1). These results indicate that our manipula-

SOCIAL IDENTITY CONTINGENCIES

tions were successful and that participants were attuned to these
cues.

Trust and Comfort
Next, we assessed the degree of trust and comfort toward the
setting that participants reported. The 2 (minority representation
cue: high or low) ⫻ 2 (diversity philosophy cue: colorblind or
value-diversity) ANOVA on trust and comfort yielded a significant main effect of minority representation, F(1, 57) ⫽ 14.80, p ⫽
.001, and a significant main effect of diversity philosophy, F(1,
57) ⫽ 12.06, p ⫽ .001. These main effects, however, were qualified by a significant Minority Representation ⫻ Diversity Philosophy interaction, F(1, 57) ⫽ 6.74, p ⫽ .01. The condition means
are presented in Figure 1. When minority group representation was
high, participants trusted the setting regardless of whether the
stated diversity philosophy was colorblind or valuing diversity
(F ⬍ 1). In contrast, when minority representation was low,
participants in the colorblind condition trusted the setting less than
did participants in the value-diversity condition, F(1, 57) ⫽ 19.82,
p ⫽ .001, ␩2 ⫽ .26. These results are consistent with the cue
interactive model. Participants in the high minority representation
condition trusted the setting regardless of the stated diversity
philosophy. Participants in the low minority representation appeared to interpret the colorblind philosophy as threatening and
showed the lowest level of trust. The contrast in which the difference between the low minority representation and colorblind condition and all the other conditions was tested was significant, F(1,
57) ⫽ 31.05, p ⫽ .001, ␩2 ⫽ .35.

Social Identity Contingencies
For each of the 11 categories, percentages were calculated by
dividing the number of response units in a given category by the
total number of response units provided by the participant. This

HIGH MINORITY REPRESENTATION

LOW MINORITY REPRESENTATION

6

Perceived trust (1 - 7)

5

4

3

2
COLORBLIND

VALUE-DIVERSITY

Figure 1. Trust in company settings among African American participants in Experiment 1. A shortened (2– 6) scale is shown. The error bars
indicate standard errors for each mean.

621

technique controls for variation in overall number of responses
given by a participant (Kanagawa, Cross, & Markus, 2001; see
also, Tsai, 2001). Participants provided an average of 7.23 response units and there were no significant differences in the
number of responses provided across condition, (Fs ⬍ 1). Percentages are presented in all text and tables.
To illustrate the kinds of responses African American professionals spontaneously reported, we examined the top five categories of free responses in order from highest to lowest frequency.
The category with the highest frequency of responses was “concern about being devalued due to racial identity” (M ⫽ 17.81%,
SD ⫽ 21.29). This category reflected contingencies such as African Americans’ expecting to be passed over for promotions, feeling excluded from social events, and feeling that their race would
be relevant to how others view them. The category with the next
highest frequency of responses was “concern about my potential
job in the company” (M ⫽ 15.83%, SD ⫽ 21.58), followed by
“skepticism about company diversity policies” (M ⫽ 12.68%,
SD ⫽ 19.56), “concern that the company is overly competitive”
(M ⫽ 10.55%, SD ⫽15.98), and “positive treatment in company
due to racial identity” (M ⫽ 9.62%, SD ⫽ 18.07). See Table 1 for
all categories and percentages.
If minority representation and diversity philosophy cues convey
the degree of threat or safety that one should expect in a given
setting, then different combinations of these cues should lead
African Americans to expect greater or fewer social identity contingencies. This hypothesis was tested by first subtracting the
percentage of positive identity contingencies (category ⫽ positive
treatment by company due to racial identity) from the percentage
of negative identity contingencies (category ⫽ concern about
being devalued due to racial identity). This technique is commonly
used when computing the valence of a thought protocol (Maheswaran & Chaiken, 1991). Social identity contingency data were
examined with a 2 (minority representation cue: high or low) ⫻ 2
(diversity philosophy cue: colorblind or value-diversity) ANOVA.
The results yielded only a significant interaction, F(1, 57) ⫽ 8.88,
p ⫽ .004. When minority representation was high, participants in
the colorblind condition expected relatively fewer threatening social identity contingencies (M ⫽ ⫺9.70%, SD ⫽ 32.28) than did
participants in the value-diversity condition, (M ⫽ 14.30%, SD ⫽
26.83), F(1, 57) ⫽ 5.31, p ⫽ .02, ␩2 ⫽ .09. But when minority
representation was low, participants in the colorblind condition
(M ⫽ 24.63%, SD ⫽ 27.38) expected relatively more threatening
social identity contingencies than did participants in the valuediversity condition (M ⫽ 5.00%, SD ⫽ 27.32), F(1, 57) ⫽ 3.64,
p ⫽ .058, ␩2 ⫽ .06. The contrast testing the difference between the
low minority representation and colorblind condition and all the
other conditions was again consistent with the cue interactive
model, F(1, 57) ⫽ 6.09, p ⫽ .02, ␩2 ⫽ .10.
For exploratory purposes, we also tested whether African
Americans’ expectations of social identity contingencies mediated the effect of setting cues on trust. In a series of regression
analyses recommended by Baron and Kenny (1986), participants who read about a company characterized by a low minority representation and a colorblind philosophy felt significantly less trust than did participants in the other three
conditions, which did not differ significantly from one another,
(␤ ⫽ .59, t ⫽ 5.61, p ⫽ .001). Participants in the low minority
representation and colorblind condition also reported relatively

PURDIE-VAUGHNS ET AL.

622

more negative social identity contingencies than did participants in the other three groups, which again, did not differ
significantly from one another, (␤ ⫽ ⫺.30, t ⫽ ⫺2.39, p ⫽ .02).
However, in the final step, participants’ social identity contingencies did not predict trust when controlling for the low
minority representation and colorblind condition (t ⬍ 1).

Discussion
For African American professionals, minority representation
and diversity philosophy cues interacted to signal the degree of
identity-contingent threat or safety that they expected to experience in corporate settings. These cues also affected their
anticipated trust and feelings of comfort. When more minorities
were depicted in the newsletter, participants were more likely to
trust the company than when there were fewer minorities. Yet,
when few minorities were depicted in the newsletter, participants in the colorblind condition felt less trust and comfort in
the company setting than did participants in the value-diversity
condition. Our analysis of trust ratings of participants in the low
minority representation and colorblind condition versus ratings
in the other three conditions revealed a trust gap of approximately 42%. African Americans’ expectations of social identity
contingencies did not mediate the effect of setting cues on trust
in this experiment. We used open-ended responses to assess
social identity contingencies, and this measure may have been
insensitive to mediational analysis.
It is noteworthy that African Americans’ expectations of social
identity contingencies extended beyond the negative stereotypes
about intellectual ability that have been the focus of much of the
stereotype threat research. The qualitative responses of African
American professionals focused largely on concerns about their
degree of fit with the setting itself. For instance, one participant
expected a mismatch between her values and the demands of the
setting: “Feeling pressure to go to a music club and really hating
the music but not feeling comfortable enough to complain.” Another participant explicitly mentioned treatment: “My main concern would be how they would treat people of color. This is a
company about money and performance not ethics.” Positive social identity contingencies focused on the absence of concerns in
the setting; “I would imagine a positive collaborative experience
with individuals on the project teams.”
It is interesting to note that participants in the high minority
representation and value-diversity condition reported as many
threatening identity contingencies as reported by participants in the
low minority representation and colorblind condition. Again, the
balance of positive and negative contingencies mattered. Just as
low minority representation coupled with colorblindness can raise
concerns, two seemingly positive cues may raise concerns about
being valued only on the basis of one’s identity. But, the difference
between the two conditions appears to be that whereas in the high
minority representation and value-diversity condition, one’s race is
salient, in the low minority representation and colorblind condition, only threats associated with one’s identity are salient.
Finally, the results of Experiment 1 provided clues about how
situational cues might interact. Our findings are consistent with the
cue interactive model. Once minority representation changed from
large to small, African Americans’ trust in a colorblind setting
diminished and the number of threatening social identity contin-

gencies increased because the meaning of colorblindness changed
from affirming to threatening.

Experiment 2
The purpose of Experiment 2 was to test whether expectations
of threatening identity contingencies mediated the effect of colorblind and low minority representation cues on African Americans’
trust. To assess identity contingencies, we drew from one of social
stigma’s classic paradigms: exposing participants to an attributionally ambiguous scenario (Crocker & Major, 1989) and testing
whether only colorblind and low minority representation cues
triggered identity-contingent devaluation. Specifically, participants learned that the company executive board dismissed an
African American junior colleague while promoting a White senior colleague. The scenario was designed such that prior to cue
exposure, participants were unsure whether the dismissal involved
discrimination.
Our interest was not in the consequences of perceiving a
discriminatory cue on expectations of discrimination. Rather,
our hypothesis was that cues that are seemingly irrelevant to
overt prejudice—in this paradigm, a setting with few minorities
and a colorblind diversity philosophy—would be enough to
trigger expectations of discrimination. Accordingly, our primary dependent measure was expectations of identitycontingent devaluation in relation to the dismissal. We predicted that participants in the low minority representation and
colorblind condition would show higher levels of concern that
the dismissal was identity-contingent than would participants in
any of the other conditions. We further predicted that expectations of identity-contingent devaluation would mediate the effect of setting cues on trust and feelings of comfort.

Method
Participants
We recruited 60 African American professionals (42 women, 18
men) from the same African American networking mixer in the
San Francisco Bay area (i.e., the same type of event at which
Experiment 1 was conducted). All participants were run onsite and
were paid $10 on completion of the experiment. Mean age of
participants was 32.62 years (SD ⫽ 8.7; range ⫽ 21– 61 years). Of
the participants, 76% had completed at least a bachelor’s degree.
Participants who were not African American (n ⫽ 3) or who did
not complete the manipulation check correctly (n ⫽ 6) were
dropped from the analysis, yielding 51 participants in the final
analysis. These participants were randomly assigned to one of the
four experimental conditions.

Stimulus Materials
Corporate brochure. The materials used were identical to
those in Experiment 1.
Corporate dismissal. The one-page ostensible dismissal included background information about a White senior partner and
an African American junior partner, a description of the workrelated conflict, and a summary of how the conflict was resolved.
As part of the dismissal, the partners worked together on a corporate merger, yet only the senior partner was promoted. The part-

SOCIAL IDENTITY CONTINGENCIES

ners’ ethnicities were identified by their names (i.e., Evan McGregor, Wesley Jackson) and their respective undergraduate
institutions (i.e., Princeton, Morehouse). Otherwise, the case never
explicitly mentioned race. Pilot testing revealed that African
American professionals perceived the role of identity-contingent
factors in the dismissal as ambiguous. Participants read the dismissal after reading the brochure and before completing the dependent measures.

Measures
Identity-contingent devaluation. Participants completed a 13item measure assessing whether identity-contingent devaluation
motivated the dismissal (i.e., How much did each of the following
items contribute to Jackson’s dismissal?). The 13-items were stereotypes, inequality, justice, racism, equality, evenhandedness,
rules, integrity, injustice, neutrality, facts, protocol, and prejudice.
These items were measured on 7-point scales anchored by the
phrases extremely disagree (1) and extremely agree (7). Accordingly, the negative items were reverse scored, and the items were
averaged. Internal reliabilities (Cronbach’s ␣) were .83.
Trust, comfort, and manipulation checks. These items were
identical to those used in Experiment 1.

Results
Manipulation Checks
The 2 (minority representation: high or low) ⫻ 2 (diversity
philosophy cue: colorblind or value-diversity) ANOVA on ethnic diversity revealed only a significant main effect of minority
representation, F(1, 47) ⫽ 40.76, p ⫽ .001, with participants
who saw more minorities rating the company as more diverse
(M ⫽ 5.10, SD ⫽ 1.57) than did participants who saw fewer
minorities (M ⫽ 2.45, SD ⫽ 1.62). The 2 ⫻ 2 ANOVA on
stated diversity philosophy revealed a significant main effect of
minority representation, F(1, 47) ⫽ 4.73, p ⫽ .03, which was
qualified by a significant interaction, F(1, 47) ⫽ 4.27, p ⫽ .04.
When minority group representation was high, participants
rated the setting as acknowledging people’s backgrounds and
differences regardless of whether the stated diversity philosophy was colorblind (M ⫽ 3.36, SD ⫽ 1.28) or valuing diversity
(M ⫽ 3.40, SD ⫽ 1.12; F ⬍ 1). It is interesting to note that
when minority group representation was low, participants in the
colorblind condition rated the setting as less likely to acknowledge people’s backgrounds and differences (M ⫽ 2.40, SD ⫽
1.65) than did participants in the value-diversity condition
(M ⫽ 4.08, SD ⫽ 1.62), F(1, 47) ⫽ 7.89, p ⫽ .01.

Trust and Comfort
The 2 ⫻ 2 ANOVA on trust and comfort revealed a significant
main effect of minority group representation, F(1, 47) ⫽ 5.61, p ⫽
.02, and a significant main effect of stated diversity philosophy,
F(1, 47) ⫽ 11.09, p ⫽ .002. Replicating Experiment 1, these
effects were qualified by a significant Minority Group Representation ⫻ Diversity Philosophy interaction, F(1, 47) ⫽ 4.85, p ⫽
.03. When minority group representation was high, participants
trusted the setting regardless of whether the stated diversity philosophy was colorblind (M⫽ 3.15, SD ⫽ 0.79) or valuing diversity

623

(M⫽ 3.44, SD ⫽ 0.83; F ⬍ 1). In contrast, when minority
representation was low, participants in the colorblind condition
trusted the setting less (M ⫽ 1.99, SD ⫽ 0.96) than did participants
in the value-diversity condition (M ⫽ 3.40, SD ⫽ 1.03), F(1, 47) ⫽
13.41, p ⫽ .001, ␩2 ⫽ .22.

Identity-Contingent Devaluation
As predicted, the company setting with a few minorities and a
colorblind diversity philosophy led participants to expect identitycontingent devaluation to be the source of Wesley Jackson’s
dismissal. All other configurations of cues conveyed that Jackson’s
dismissal was identity-irrelevant. Our analysis revealed a significant main effect of minority group representation, F(1, 47) ⫽ 9.14,
p ⫽ .004, and a significant main effect of the stated diversity
philosophy, F(1, 47) ⫽ 5.49, p ⫽ .02. These effects were qualified
by a significant interaction, F(1, 47) ⫽ 5.70, p ⫽ .02. When
minority group representation was high, participants did not expect
identity-contingent devaluation to be a source of Wesley Jackson’s
dismissal regardless of whether the stated diversity philosophy was
colorblind (M ⫽ 4.31, SD ⫽ 0.73) or valuing diversity (M ⫽ 4.30,
SD ⫽ 0.48; F ⬍ 1). In contrast, when minority representation was
low, participants in the colorblind condition were significantly
more likely to expect identity-contingent devaluation as a source
of the dismissal (M ⫽ 5.34, SD ⫽ 1.2) than were participants in the
value-diversity condition (M ⫽ 4.54, SD ⫽ 1.12), F(1, 47) ⫽ 9.81,
p ⫽ .003, ␩2 ⫽ .17.

Identity-Contingent Devaluation as Mediator of the
Impact of Setting Cues on Trust
We hypothesized that African Americans’ expectations of
identity-contingent devaluation would mediate the effect of setting
cues on trust. To test this prediction, we conducted a series of
regression analyses recommended by Baron and Kenny (1986). In
the first step, we established that participants who read about the
company characterized by a low minority representation and a
colorblind philosophy felt significantly less trust than did participants in the other three conditions, which did not differ significantly from one another, (␤ ⫽ .52, t ⫽ 4.28, p ⫽ .001). In the
second step, we established that participants in the low minority
representation and colorblind condition also reported stronger expectations of identity-contingent devaluations than did participants
in the other three groups, which again, did not differ significantly
from one another, (␤ ⫽ .52, t ⫽ 4.25, p ⫽ .001). In the final step,
we established that identity-contingent devaluations accounted for
32% of the decrement in trust associated with being in the low
minority representation and colorblind condition, (␤ ⫽ .31, t ⫽
2.37, p ⫽ .02). The Sobel (1982) test verified that this test of
mediation was significant, Z ⫽ 2.49, p ⫽ .01.

Discussion
In this experiment, we replicated our findings showing that the
combination of a low minority representation and a colorblind
diversity philosophy was associated with significantly less trust
and comfort in a corporate setting than were the other cue combinations. The trust gap between participants in this one condition
and participants in the other three conditions was approximately

PURDIE-VAUGHNS ET AL.

624

32%, a finding similar to the gap found in Experiment 1. Moreover, participants in this condition were more likely to view a
hypothetical situation in which an African American employee
was fired as contingent on race than were participants in the other
three conditions. These findings are striking given that the stated
cues never explicitly mention prejudice. Yet, after exposure to this
combination of cues, our participants anticipated that the setting
would be threatening for themselves or for a member of their
group. Finally, as predicted, participants’ social identity contingencies mediated the link between setting cues and trust.
Experiment 2 further established that the combination of cues
we tested interacted because they invoked different meanings. For
African Americans in corporate settings, the value-diversity cue
has one meaning; it is identity-affirming. The colorblind diversity
cue has two meanings; it conveys tolerance and intolerance (Levy
et al., 2005). When minority representation was high, African
Americans expected their identity to be irrelevant. When minority
representation was low, they expected their identity to be contingent in a setting with a colorblind diversity philosophy but irrelevant in a setting with a value-diversity philosophy.

theory and help to rule out alternative explanations. Two items
measuring racial identity were included with the expectation that
threatening cues would heighten the relevance of racial identity
and safe cues would diminish its importance. Two items verifying
that African American and White participants did not differ in their
attitudes about the importance of fairness in the workplace or in
their performance expectations were also included.
We predicted that the high fairness cue would reduce expectations of threatening identity contingencies and restore trust for
African American professionals but not for White professionals.
Further, we predicted that African Americans’ reported identity
contingencies should again mediate the effect of the stated cues on
trust. Finally, for African American professional, but not for White
professionals, we expect the high fairness cue to decrease the
importance of racial identity and the low fairness cue to increase
the importance of racial identity.

Experiment 3

We recruited 90 African American and White working professionals from three coffee shops in the San Francisco Bay area and
the greater New Haven, Connecticut area. Participants completed
an initial screening to ensure that they were working professionals.
All participants were run onsite and were paid $10 on completion
of the experiment. Participants who identified themselves as an
ethnic group other than African American or White (n ⫽ 12) or
who did not follow directions (n ⫽ 1) were dropped from the
analysis, yielding 77 participants (40 African American, 37 White)
in the final analysis. Demographics indicated this sample was
similar to those reported in Experiments 1 and 2. Mean age of
participants was 37.10 years old (SD ⫽ 11.87; range ⫽ 20 – 66
years), and 73.6% of the sample had previously worked in a
corporate setting. African American and White participants differed neither in age (t ⬍ 1), nor in corporate experience (␹2 ⬍ 1).
Gender was evenly distributed across ethnic groups (African
American: women ⫽ 52.5% and men ⫽ 47.5%; Whites: women ⫽
50% and men ⫽ 50%). Participants were randomly assigned to one
of the two experimental conditions.

If, as Experiment 2 suggests, a colorblind philosophy conveys racial intolerance when paired with low minority representation, then neutralizing African Americans’ concerns about
such intolerance should reduce threatening identity contingencies and restore trust. The primary objective of Experiment 3
was to test this reasoning.
In this experiment, all participants (African American and White
professionals) were presented with a setting depicting a low minority representation and a colorblind diversity philosophy. We
developed a cue that conveyed either high or low fairness, using an
ostensible independent auditing firm survey. When people are
assured that procedures in a given setting are fair and that personal
opinions are valued, people perceive the environment to be fair and
just (for reviews, see Tyler & Huo, 2002). Accordingly, we manipulated high or low values for three items on the auditing survey
(i.e., the company’s decisions were based on merit, all people
could be themselves and still be successful, the supervisor’s decisions reflected company ideals). We reasoned that African Americans required objective and explicit evidence of fairness to offset
the threatening interpretation of low minority representation and
colorblind cues.
If this cue conveyed a broad message of fairness, then all groups
should benefit from it. But if our setting cues activated contingencies tied to a minority identity then Whites should be unaffected by
this manipulation. Accordingly, we included White professionals,
resulting in a 2 (participant race: African American or White) ⫻ 2
(fairness: high or low) between-subjects design. To address potential demand characteristics from the first two experiments, we ran
Experiment 3 in a different location and used experimenters of
various ethnicities.
To measure identity contingencies, participants assessed how
much they expected their racial identity to be relevant to others’
perceptions of them in the company. This was one identity contingency that African Americans commonly reported in Experiment 1. Participants next completed our measure of trust. Finally,
we included three additional constructs that might inform our

Method
Participants

Stimulus Materials
Corporate brochure. The materials used were identical to
those in Experiments 1 and 2.
Auditing firm analysis. The ostensible two-page work–life
survey included a brief description of the outside auditing firm and
a bar chart summarizing the firm’s analysis of CCG.
Fairness cue. On the second page, a bar chart depicted the
auditing firm’s level of agreement with a series of eight items
about work–life issues ranging from employee benefits to workload. Items ranged from strongly disagree (1) to strongly agree
(7). We manipulated fairness by varying the degree to which the
auditing firm agreed with the following three items: “I can completely be myself and still get ahead,” “Evaluations are made
solely based on merit,” and “My supervisor’s decisions reflect the
company ideals.” The additional five filler items remained constant across condition. Neither race nor any identity-related policies were included in any part of the work–life survey.

SOCIAL IDENTITY CONTINGENCIES

Diversity philosophy cue. The diversity philosophy cue was
identical to the ones used in the previous two experiments. All
participants read only the colorblind diversity philosophy cue.
Minority representation. The minority representation cue was
also identical to the ones used in the previous experiments. All
participants were exposed to the low minority representation photographs. To bolster the manipulation, we supplemented photographs with four pie charts, depicting gender, age, years worked in
company, and racial breakdown of CCG. The fourth chart indicated that 2% of the employees were African American. These
charts remained constant across condition.

Measures
Trust and comfort. These items were identical to those used
in Experiments 1 and 2. Mean trust for African American
participants was 3.73 (SD ⫽ 1.28) and for White participants
was 4.36 (SD ⫽ 1.23).
Identity-contingent evaluations. Participants completed a
four-item measure assessing whether racial identity was relevant to
how others perceived them in the corporate setting (e.g., “My race
would be no more important than the city in which I were born”).
Items were measured on 7-point scales anchored by the phrases
strongly disagree (1) and strongly agree (7). Means for African
American participants and Whites participants were 3.38 (SD ⫽
1.48) and 3.16 (SD ⫽ 1.47), respectively. Internal reliabilities
(Cronbach’s ␣) were .80.
Racial identity. Next, participants completed two items assessing racial identity (i.e., How important is your racial identity to
you?” and “My racial identity is important to how I view myself”).
Items were measured on 7-point scales anchored by the phrases not
at all important (1) and very important (7) and the phrases strongly
disagree (1) and strongly agree (7). Internal reliabilities (Cronbach’s ␣) were .84. African American participants’ racial identity
was 6.40 (SD ⫽ 1.23); White participants’ racial identity was 4.24
(SD ⫽ 1.46).
Importance of fairness and performance expectations. Finally,
we included two items to rule out alternative explanations that
might account for racial differences between participants. The first
item was job fairness as a personal value, “How important is
confidence that you will be treated fairly by your job?” which was
anchored by not at all important (1) and very important (7), and
the second item was performance expectations, “I would expect to
perform well,” which was anchored by the phrases strongly disagree (1) and strongly agree (7).

Results
Importance of Fairness and Performance Expectations
A 2 (participant race: African American or White) ⫻ 2
(fairness cue: high or low) between-subjects ANOVA on the
importance of fairness revealed no significant main or interaction effects (Fs ⬍ 2.5). Regardless of whether participants were
in the high or low fairness condition, African American participants and White participants were equally likely to believe that
confidence in being treated fairly is important (M ⫽ 6.62, SD ⫽
0.80). A 2 ⫻ 2 ANOVA on performance expectations also
revealed no significant main or interaction effects (Fs ⬍ 1.5).

625

Regardless of whether participants were in the high or low
fairness condition, they were equally likely to expect to perform
well in the company (M ⫽ 5.04, SD ⫽ 1.45).

Trust and Comfort
Recall that low minority representation and colorblind diversity cues were held constant across condition. If an invocation
of fairness lifted concerns about a set of contingencies tied to
minority identity, African American professionals’ trust ratings
in the high fairness condition should increase while the trust of
White professionals should not be affected. Our results indicate
this is precisely what happened. The 2 (participant race: African
American or White) ⫻ 2 (fairness cue: high or low) ANOVA on
trust and comfort yielded a significant main effect of race, F(1,
73) ⫽ 4.63, p ⫽ .03, and a significant main effect of fairness,
F(1, 73) ⫽ 14.29, p ⫽ .001, which was qualified by a significant Race ⫻ Fairness cue interaction, F(1, 73) ⫽ 12.19, p ⫽
.001. As predicted, African American participants in the high
fairness condition trusted the setting more (M ⫽ 4.73, SD ⫽
0.83) than did African American participants in the low fairness
condition (M ⫽ 2.92, SD ⫽ 0.96), F(1, 73) ⫽ 27.38, p ⫽ .001,
␩2 ⫽ .27. By contrast, White participants’ trust toward the
setting did not differ whether they were in the high (M ⫽ 4.39,
SD ⫽ 1.38) or the low (M ⫽ 4.32, SD ⫽ 1.1) fairness condition
(F ⬍ 1). Stated another way, the African American–White trust
gap was closed by exposure to the fairness cue.

Identity-Contingent Evaluations
The 2 ⫻ 2 ANOVA revealed only a significant main effect of
fairness, F(1, 73) ⫽ 7.96, p ⫽ .006, which was qualified by a
significant Race ⫻ Fairness cue interaction, F(1, 73) ⫽ 11.68, p ⫽
.001. African American participants in the high fairness condition
reported that their race would be less relevant to how they were
perceived by others (M ⫽ 2.58, SD ⫽ 1.14) than did African
American participants in the low fairness condition (M ⫽ 4.47,
SD ⫽ 1.16), F(1, 73) ⫽ 20.15, p ⫽ .001, ␩2 ⫽ .22. White
participants’ scores on the identity-contingent evaluation measure
did not differ whether they were in the high (M ⫽ 3.75, SD ⫽ 1.76)
or the low (M ⫽ 3.25, SD ⫽ 1.17) fairness condition (F ⬍ 1).

Identity-Contingent Evaluations as Mediator of Link
Between Fairness Cue and Trust
To test whether expectations of identity-contingent evaluations
mediated the effect of the fairness cue on African American
participants’ trust, we again conducted a series of regression analyses (Baron & Kenny, 1986). As there was no effect of the fairness
cue for White participants, they were excluded from this analysis.
The fairness cue significantly predicted African American participants’ trust (␤ ⫽ .71, t ⫽ 6.25, p ⫽ .001). The fairness cue
significantly predicted the hypothesized mediator: expectations of
identity-contingent evaluations, (␤ ⫽ .64, t ⫽ 5.14, p ⫽ .001). In
the final step, African American participants’ expectations of
identity-contingent evaluations predicted trust while controlling
for the stated fairness cue, (␤ ⫽ .46, t ⫽ 3.54, p ⫽ .001). The effect
of the fairness cue dropped from ␤ ⫽ .71, t ⫽ 6.25, p ⫽ .001 to

PURDIE-VAUGHNS ET AL.

626

␤ ⫽ .42, t ⫽ 3.21, p ⫽ .003. This test of mediation was significant
(Z ⫽ 2.91, p ⫽ .004; Sobel, 1982).

Racial Identity
Finally, the 2 (participant race: African American or White) ⫻
2 (fairness cue: high or low) ANOVA revealed only a significant
main effect of race F(1, 73) ⫽ 51.03, p ⫽ .001, and a significant
main effect of fairness, F(1, 73) ⫽ 6.49, p ⫽ .01. The Race ⫻
Fairness cue interaction was not significant (F ⬍ 1). However, the
pattern of means suggests that for African American participants,
the fairness cue affected their racial identity. African American
participants in the high fairness condition reported that their racial
identity was less important to them (M ⫽ 5.89, SD ⫽ 1.61)
compared with African American participants in the low fairness
condition (M ⫽ 6.82, SD ⫽ .50), F(1, 73) ⫽ 5.09, p ⫽ .03, ␩2 ⫽
.07. White participants’ scores did not differ as a function of
whether fairness was high (M ⫽ 3.94, SD ⫽ 1.39) or low (M ⫽
4.53, SD ⫽ 1.50; F ⬍ 2, ␩2 ⫽ .03).

Discussion
In settings where African Americans expect threatening identity contingencies—in this paradigm, low minority representation coupled with colorblindness—an explicit cue conveying
fair practices can forestall appraisals of threat. African American professionals in the high fairness condition trusted the
setting more than did African American professionals in the low
fairness condition. Indeed, the trust gap found in the previous
two experiments was eliminated.
African American participants in the high fairness condition
were also less likely to expect that their race would be relevant to
how they were perceived by others. Replicating our findings from
Experiment 2, these identity contingencies mediated the effect of
the fairness cue on African Americans’ trust of the corporate
setting. White professionals showed no effect of the fairness condition. This finding is consistent with the assertion that our setting
cues do not undermine feelings of trust and safety for White
professionals in the way that these cues do for historically marginalized groups.
In sum, Experiment 3 is important because it helps explain why
the low minority representation and colorblind cues convey threat.
In response to these cues, African Americans expect that their race
will be problematized. Here, the colorblind diversity cue is interpreted negatively, which activates expectations of threatening
identity contingencies and undermines African Americans’ institutional trust. But when an invocation of fairness allays their
concerns, African Americans no longer expect that their identity
will be problematized in the setting. The colorblind diversity cue
here is interpreted positively. This interpretation does not activate
threatening identity contingencies and maintains African Americans’ feelings of trust and safety in the setting.

General Discussion
The present investigation began with the idea that situational
cues in a given setting convey one’s social identity contingencies—possible judgments, stereotypes, opportunities, restrictions,
and treatments that are tied to one’s social identity in a given

setting. When cues convey the threat of identity-contingent evaluations, trust in the setting can be undermined. When cues signal
affirming contingencies or evaluations that are not identitycontingent, trust can be sustained. We tested the hypothesis that for
African Americans, minority representation and diversity philosophy cues would interact to convey social identity contingencies,
which in turn, would affect their trust. The three experiments we
have presented support this reasoning.
In Experiment 1, we examined how setting cues triggered
African Americans’ spontaneous reports about the kinds of
identity contingencies they expected to face in the workplace.
When minority representation was low, African Americans who
were exposed to colorblind cues reported the greatest number of
threatening and the fewest number of affirming identity contingencies. Moreover, these cues diminished their trust. For all
other combinations of cues, African Americans reported relatively fewer threatening identity contingencies, and their trust
in the setting was sustained. In Experiment 2, African Americans read about a situation designed to diagnose their expectations of identity contingencies—an attributionally ambiguous
confrontation in the workplace. We tested whether the same
cues—small minority representation coupled with colorblindness—would again convey more threatening identity contingencies than any other combination of cues. They did. These cues
led African American professionals to expect that a confrontation in which an African American employee was fired was
contingent on race. Moreover, identity-contingent evaluations
mediated the effect of setting cues on trust.
In Experiment 3, we tested an intervention designed to refute
expectations of threatening identity contingencies and to restore
African Americans’ trust. African American and White professionals were exposed to small minority representation and colorblind
cues. Our results confirmed that for African Americans but not
Whites, a simple yet powerful invocation of fairness effectively
closed the trust gap despite exposure to negative setting cues. And,
for African Americans, identity-contingent evaluations—a measure assessing the degree to which their identity would be relevant
to how others perceived them—again mediated the effect of cues
on trust. Taken together, these experiments show that features of
mainstream settings can convey threatening identity contingencies
among African Americans that manifest in lower trust and comfort
in the setting. But these experiments also show that this sense of
threat can be lifted and one’s sense of trust restored, even when
some of the cues in the setting still signal the need for vigilance.

Consideration of Processes Underlying Cue Interaction
Our results suggest that when people face multiple situational
cues, those indicating minority representation and the stated
diversity philosophy interact. We proposed three models about
how situational cues might convey threatening or affirming
identity contingencies. Our results are most consistent with the
notion that it was the ambiguity of the cues that led them to
dynamically interact.
Low minority representation may have been more ambiguous
than high minority representation. Token status research shows
that people may interpret a setting with few minorities as genuine
or as merely symbolic (Kanter, 1977; Sekaquaptewa & Thompson,
2003). If African Americans perceived low minority representation

SOCIAL IDENTITY CONTINGENCIES

as ambiguous then they would have interpreted it as symbolic—
and thus identity-contingent—when paired with colorblindness
and as genuine—and thus identity-irrelevant—when paired with
valuing diversity. Similarly, colorblindness may have been more
ambiguous than the value-diversity philosophy. Public policy
makers use colorblindness to endorse and to undermine policies
such as affirmative action because it can convey either racial
tolerance or intolerance, as noted previously (Glazer, 1997; Levy
et al., 2005). If African Americans perceived colorblindness as
ambiguous then they would have interpreted it as identitycontingent when paired with low minority representation and as
identity-irrelevant when paired with high minority representation.
Although we did not directly test this reasoning, our best assessment of how cues interacted is that low minority representation
and colorblindness cues were sufficiently ambiguous for one cue
to have changed the meaning of the other.
Our analysis raises an important question: Does the model of
cue interaction apply for all combinations of cues or only for
ambiguous ones? To thoroughly answer this question, one might
work toward developing a taxonomy of cues with different properties. Cues may vary in their degree of ambiguity, as well as in
their strength, vividness, self-relevance, and relevance to a particular setting. Although this is beyond the scope of the present
investigation, future research in this area would benefit greatly
from an exploration of the general properties of cues.

Identity Contingencies and Alternative Explanations
Some may argue that our findings reflect people’s concerns
about their future performance in potentially threatening settings,
and low expectations about one’s performance have been shown to
affect performance, motivation, effort, and efficacy in academic
and workplace settings (Bandura, 1977; Cadinu, Maass, Frigerio,
Impagliazzo, & Latinotti, 2003; Stangor, Carr, & Kiang, 1998).
Although both expectancy and identity contingency paradigms
allow one to evaluate future probabilities, the processes they
emphasize are substantially different. In performance expectation
paradigms, people hold concerns about their ability to accomplish
a specified task. In our identity contingency paradigm, setting cues
activate expectations about how one may be treated. In the present
experiments, participants were not evaluated on the basis of their
performance nor were they ever under the impression that they
would be. In addition, Experiment 3, which directly assessed
performance expectations, revealed no differences by race or by
condition in participants’ expectations about their ability to perform in the setting.
A second alternative explanation would be that the results were
due to stereotype threat, especially insofar as our procedures
involved assessments of threatening environments. Two considerations, we believe, distinguish stereotype threat from social identity contingencies. First, for stereotype threat process to occur, a
person must be aware of the content of a negative stereotype and
must engage in a behavior that may confirm the stereotype (Steele
& Aronson, 1995). As we stated earlier, participants in our experiments never engaged in any behaviors relevant to the workplace
setting about which they were briefed nor were they led to believe
they would engage in behaviors where they risked being reduced
to a stereotype. Negative stereotypes were relevant to our experimental settings, but we simply note that being perceived through

627

the lens of a negative stereotype is one of many different types of
identity contingencies a person may face.
Second, research on stereotype threat seems to be of limited
relevance in understanding our findings with respect to diversity
ideologies. If African Americans were concerned with being
judged stereotypically, than an ideology of colorblindness—which
emphasizes ignoring group memberships—should allay these concerns. But to the extent that African Americans are attentive to
cues signaling how they will be valued and treated, ignoring group
membership is threatening when it implies that a setting values
prototypicality or sameness. In workplaces where prototypical
behaviors are often linked to American majority groups, colorblind
cues should activate threat. This is precisely what occurred in the
present experiments. Our finding that colorblindness can undermine trust—though inconsistent with stereotype threat—is quite
consistent with our identity-contingency framework.
In our view, the notion that African Americans attend to setting
cues that activate or refute identity contingencies is an initial stage
that— depending on the outcome of this process—may give rise to
stereotype threat. When situational cues do activate threatening
identity contingencies, this type of setting may give rise to stereotype threat when is subject to evaluative tasks. For instance,
African American professionals should show decrements in test
performance when the minority representation is low and the
diversity philosophy is colorblind but not when it is valuing of
diversity. This is one direction we are currently investigating.
We believe that the current findings provide compelling new
evidence for the role of setting cues in signaling the threat or the
safety one may expect in a given setting. Each group at risk of
devaluation holds a core set of identity-based concerns. Similar to
Walter Mischel’s (1973; Shoda, Mischel, & Wright, 1994) “if . . .
then” personality dynamics, our social identity framework stems
from an interaction between cues in the environment and group
identity. Ongoing research in our laboratory, for instance, reveals
that the identity contingencies of female professionals in corporate
workplaces revolve around interpersonal power dynamics,
whereas the identity contingencies of female scientists are similar
to those of African Americans in corporate settings (i.e., fairness;
Grewal & Purdie-Vaughns, 2007). Here, different settings give rise
to different contingencies for professional women. In other studies,
we have found that gay men are more attuned to social intimacy
cues in corporate settings than are heterosexual ones (Sedlovskaya
& Purdie-Vaughns, 2007). For sexual minorities, intimacy cues in
corporate settings raise the possibility that one’s sexual identity
may be exposed and devalued. Following Goffman’s (1971) recommendations, our framework suggests a research strategy for
understanding the process of stigmatization among multiple
groups at risk of devaluation. Engaging in close analysis of distinctive cues and identities may be an important next step to
research on the social construction of stigmatization.

Limitations and Issues for Future Research
It is worth noting limitations in the present research. First, the
experiments depicted only corporate settings. It is possible that
recent corporate scandals in American society (Bohnet & Meier,
2005) may have heightened African Americans’ sense that corporate settings are ambiguous with respect to attitudes toward their
racial group. This problem is balanced, we would argue, by the

PURDIE-VAUGHNS ET AL.

628

recognition that the business domain is the largest employer of
American citizens and is the most likely setting African Americans
will face. Moreover, African Americans are more likely to obtain
bachelor’s degrees in business or law than in any other domain
(Harvey & Anderson, 2005). A second limitation concerns the
sample and recruitment method. Although an effort was made to
randomly select African Americans at the networking events
where Experiments 1 and 2 were conducted, restricting our recruited sample to participants who normally attend such events
could limit the generalizability of our results. Experiment 3, however, which was conducted in a different field setting, had effects
consistent with Experiments 1 and 2.

Concluding Remarks
In closing, we return to questions with which we began. What
might our research illuminate about settings where people from
diverse backgrounds are likely to participate? How might such
settings function to make everyone feel safe and trusting regardless of their group-based and personal differences? First,
our research illuminates the challenges that diversity contexts
may pose. Most schools and workplaces—reflecting the broader
society—are saturated with cues that signal devaluation of
certain social identities: for example, low minority representation, few individuals from underrepresented groups in positions
of power, and curricula and practices that inadvertently marginalize certain group identities. Reducing identity-related
threats that are rooted in the setting may therefore be the most
effective intervention to improve intergroup relations. Second,
we suggest, there is a need to recognize that no single factor is
likely to relax identity-based threats for all groups engaged in
the setting. Certain cues may make a situation identity-safe, but
only when presented in the context of other cues in the setting.
In conclusion, our research demonstrates that a variety of cues
may threaten a person based on group identity. We demonstrate
that one’s identity and contingencies that go with that identity are
derived from social context. In this respect, then, there is the
possibility of a solution. The experience of threatening identity
contingencies can be reduced by small yet powerful changes in the
setting that diminish both the threat and its perception.

References
Abrams, D., & Hogg, M. A. (1999). Social identity and social cognition.
Malden, MA: Blackwell Publishers.
Adams, G., Garcia, D., Purdie-Vaughns, V., & Steele, C. (2006). The
detrimental effects of a suggestion of sexism in an instruction situation.
Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 42, 602– 615.
Allport, G. W. (1954). The nature of prejudice. New York: Doubleday.
Bandura, A. (1977). Social learning theory. New York: General Learning
Press.
Baron, R. M., & Kenny, D. A. (1986). The moderator–mediator variable
distinction in social psychological research: Conceptual, strategic, and
statistical considerations. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
51, 1173–1182.
Bohnet, I., & Meier, S. (2005, October). Deciding to distrust (KSG
Working Paper No. RWP05– 049). Available from Social Science Research Network Web site: http://ssrn.com/abstract⫽839225.
Bonilla-Silva, E. (2006). Racism without racists: Color-blind racism and
the persistence of racial inequality in the United States. Lanham, MD:
Rowman & Littlefield.

Buchan, N., Croson, R., & Dawes, R. (2002). Swift neighbors and persistent strangers: A cross-cultural investigation of trust and reciprocity in
social exchange. American Journal of Sociology, 108(1), 168 –206.
Cadinu, M., Maass, A., Frigerio, S., Impagliazzo, L., & Latinotti, S. (2003).
Stereotype threat: The effect of expectancy on performance. European
Journal of Social Psychology, 33, 267–285.
Carter, S. (1991). Reflections of an affirmative action baby. New York:
Basic Books.
Cohen, G., Steele, C. M., & Ross, L. D. (1999). The mentor’s dilemma:
Providing critical feedback across the racial divide. Personality and
Social Psychology Bulletin, 25, 1302–1318.
Crocker, J., & Major, B. (1989). Social stigma and self-esteem: The
self-protective properties of stigma. Psychological Review, 96, 608 –
630.
Davies, P. G., Spencer, S. J., & Steele, C. M. (2005). Clearing the air:
Identity safety moderates the effects of stereotype threat on women’s
leadership aspirations. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
88, 276 –287.
Feldman-Barrett, L., & Swim, J. K. (1998). Appraisals of prejudice and
discrimination. In J. K. Swim & C. Stangor (Eds.), Prejudice: The
target’s perspective (pp. 12–37). San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Fredrickson, G. M. (1999). Models of American ethnic relations: A historical perspective. In D. A. Prentice & D. T. Miller (Eds.), Cultural
divides: Understanding and overcoming group conflict (pp. 23–34).
New York: Russell Sage Foundation.
Glazer, N. (1997). We are all multiculturalists now. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.
Goffman, E. (1963). Stigma: Notes on the management of a spoiled
identity. New York: Touchstone.
Goffman, E. (1971). Relations in public: Microstudies of the public order.
New York: Basic Books.
Grewal, D., & Purdie-Vaughns, V. (2007). Take charge or be a team
player? The effects of management style and gender representation on
women’s perceptions of the workplace. Manuscript in preparation.
Harvey, W. B., & Anderson, E. L. (2005, February). Minorities in higher
education 2003–2004: Twenty-first annual status report (Item No.
310479). Washington, DC: American Council on Education.
Hutter, R. H., & Crisp, R. J. (2005). The composition of category conjunctions. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 31, 647– 657.
Inman, M. L., & Baron, R. S. (1996). Influence of prototypes on perceptions of prejudice. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 70,
727–739.
Inzlicht, M., & Ben-Zeev, T. (2000). A threatening intellectual environment: Why females are susceptible to experiencing problem-solving
deficits in the presence of males. Psychological Science, 11, 365–371.
Inzlicht, M., & Good, C. (2006). How environments threaten academic
performance, self-knowledge, and sense of belonging. In S. Levin & C.
van Laar (Eds.), Stigma and group inequality: Social psychological
approaches (pp. 129 –150). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Irving, M. A., & Hudley, C. (2005). Cultural mistrust, academic outcome
expectations, and outcome value among African American males. Urban
Education, 40, 476 – 496.
Kanagawa, C., Cross, S. E., & Markus, H. R. (2001). “Who am I?” The
cultural psychology of the conceptual self. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 27, 90 –103.
Kanter, R. M. (1977). Men and women of the corporation. New York:
Basic Books.
Kunda, Z. (1990). The case for motivated reasoning. Psychological Bulletin, 108, 480 – 490.
Levy, S. R., West, T., & Ramirez, L. (2005). Lay theories and intergroup relations: A social developmental perspective. In W. Stroebe &
M. Hewstone (Eds.), The European review of social psychology, 16,
189 –220.
Lord, C. G., & Saenz, D. S. (1985). Memory deficits and memory surfeits:

SOCIAL IDENTITY CONTINGENCIES
Differential cognitive consequences of tokenism for tokens and observers. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 49, 918 –926.
Maheswaran, D., & Chaiken, S. (1991). Promoting systematic processing
in low motivation settings: Effect of incongruent information on processing and judgment. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 61,
13–25.
Major, B., & O’Brien, L. T. (2005). The social psychology of stigma.
Annual Review of Psychology, 56, 393– 421.
Major, B., Quinton, W. J., & Schmader, T. (2003). Attributions to discrimination and self-esteem: Impact of group identification and situational
ambiguity. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 39, 220 –231.
Mannix, E., & Neale, M. (2005). What differences make a difference? The
promise and reality of diverse teams in organizations. Psychology in the
Public Interest, 6, 31–55.
Markus, H. R., Steele, C. M., & Steele, D. M. (2000). Colorblindness as a
barrier to inclusion: Assimilation and nonimmigrant minorities. Daedalus, 129, 233–259.
McGuire, W., McGuire, C., Child, P., & Fujioko, T. (1978). Salience of
ethnicity in the spontaneous self-concept as a function of one’s ethnic
distinctiveness in the social environment. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 36, 511–520.
Microsoft. (n.d.). [Corporate photographs]. From Windows Photo Gallery:
http://www.microsft.com
Mischel, W. (1973). Toward a cognitive social learning reconceptualization of personality. Psychological Review, 80, 252–283.
Plaut, V. C. (2002). Cultural models of diversity: The psychology of
difference and inclusion. In R. Shweder, M. Minow, & H. R. Markus
(Eds.), Engaging cultural differences: The multicultural challenge in
liberal democracies (pp. 365–395). New York: Russell Sage Foundation.
Purdie-Vaughns, V. J. (2004). Identity contingency threat: The impact of
circumstantial cues on African-Americans’ trust in diverse settings.
Dissertation Abstracts International, 65 (4B), 2149. (UMI No.
AAT3128463)
Schmader, T., & Johns, M. (2003). Converging evidence that stereotype
threat reduces working memory capacity. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 85, 440 – 452.
Schofield, J. W. (1986). Causes and consequences of the colorblind perspective. In J. F. Dovidio & S. Gaertner (Eds.), Prejudice, discrimination, and racism (pp. 231–254). New York: Academic Press.
Sears, D. O., Citrin, J., Cheleden, S. V., & van Laar, C. (1999). Cultural
diversity and multicultural politics: Is ethnic balkanization psychologically inevitable? In D. A. Prentice & D. T. Miller (Eds.), Cultural
divides: Understanding and overcoming group conflict (pp. 35–79).
New York: Russell Sage Foundation.
Sedlovskaya, A., & Purdie-Vaughns, V. (2007). Social intimacy cues and
identity threat among people with concealable stigmas. Manuscript in
preparation.
Sekaquaptewa, D., & Thompson, M. (2003). Solo status, stereotype threat,
and performance expectancies: Their effects on women’s performance.
Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 39, 68 –74.
Shoda, Y., Mischel, W., & Wright, J. C. (1994). Intraindividual stability in

629

the organization and patterning of behavior: Incorporating psychological
situations into the idiographic analysis of personality. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 67, 674 – 687.
Sinclair, L., & Kunda, Z. (1999). Reactions to a Black professional:
Motivated inhibition and activation of conflicting stereotypes. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 77, 885–904.
Sobel, M. E. (1982). Asymptotic intervals for indirect effects in structural
equations models. In S. Leinhart (Ed.), Sociological methodology 1982
(pp. 290 –312). San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Stangor, C., Carr, C., & Kiang, L. (1998). Activating stereotypes undermines task performance expectations. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 75, 1191–1197.
Steele, C. M., & Aronson, J. (1995). Stereotype threat and the intellectual
test performance of African Americans. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 69, 797– 811.
Steele, C. M., Spencer, S. J., & Aronson, J. (2002). Contending with group
image: The psychology of stereotype and social identity threat. In M. P.
Zanna (Ed.), Advances in experimental social psychology (Vol. 34, pp.
379 – 440). San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Tajfel, H., & Turner, J. C. (1979). An integrative theory of intergroup
conflict. In W. G. Austin & S. Worchel (Eds.), The social psychology of
intergroup relations (pp. 33– 47). Monterey, CA: Brooks Cole.
Thomas, D. A. (2001). The truth about mentoring minorities: Race matters.
Harvard Business Review, 79, 98 –112.
Tsai, J. L. (2001). Cultural orientation of Hmong young adults. Journal of
Human Behavior in the Social Environment, 3, 99 –114.
Tyler, T. R. (2001). Public trust and confidence in legal authorities: What
do majority and minority group members want from the law and legal
authorities? Behavioral Science and the Law, 19, 215–235.
Tyler, T. R., & Blader, S. L. (2000). Cooperation in groups: Procedural
justice, social identity, and behavioral engagement. New York: New
York University Psychology Press.
Tyler, T. R., & Huo, Y. J. (2002). Trust in the law: Encouraging public
cooperation with the police and courts. New York: Russell Sage
Foundation.
Verkuyten, M. (2005). Ethnic group identification, and group evaluations
among minority and majority groups: Testing the multiculturalism hypothesis. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 88, 121–138.
Walton, G. M., & Cohen, G. L. (2007). A question of belonging: Race,
social fit, and achievement. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 92, 82–96.
Warr, M. (1990). Dangerous situations: Social context and fear of victimization. Social Forces, 68, 891–907.
Wolsko, C., Park, B., Judd, C. M., & Wittenbrink, B. (2000). Framing
interethnic ideology: Effects of multicultural and colorblind perspectives
on judgments of groups and individuals. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 78, 635– 654.
Yoder, J., Crumpton, P., & Zipp, J. (1989). The power of numbers in
influencing hiring decisions. Gender & Society, 3, 269–7276.
Yoshino, K. (2006). Covering: The hidden assault on our civil rights. New
York: Random House.

(Appendixes follow)

PURDIE-VAUGHNS ET AL.

630

Appendix A
Photographs From Corporate Brochure
Low minority representation condition

Our People
High minority representation condition

Our People
Note. From Windows Photo Gallery, by Microsoft, n.d. In the public domain.

Appendix B
Trust and Comfort Toward the Company Setting
1.

I think I would like to work at a place like CCG.

2.

I think I would like to work in a company that has similar hiring practices as those of
CCG.

3.

I think I would like to work under the supervision of people with similar values as the
staff.

4.

I think I could “be myself” at a company like CCG.

5.

I think I would be willing to put in extra effort if my supervisor asked me to.

6.

I think my colleagues at CCG would become my close personal friends.

7.

I think I would be willing to put in a great deal of effort beyond that normally expected
in order to help CCG be successful.

8.

I think I would be treated fairly by my supervisor.

9.

I think I would trust the management to treat me fairly.

10.

I think that my values and the values of CCG are very similar.

11.

I think that the CCG environment would inspire me to do the very best job that I can.
Received June 13, 2006
Revision received July 30, 2007
Accepted August 1, 2007 䡲

